 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00775 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) The Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On March 
28, 2018, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging delinquent 
debts of security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. (Item 1) 
Applicant replied to the SOR on May 9, 2018, admitting 12 of the 14 allegations of 
delinquent debt. He requested a decision based on the written record. (Item 2) The 
original action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 29, 2018. 
(Item 10) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on June 4, 
2018. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not provide a response 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 30 years old, graduated from high school in May 2006, and attended 
community colleges while on active duty but has not received a degree. He served on 
active duty in the Navy from August 2006 until February 2014. Applicant married in 
March 2010 and separated in January 2014. He has two children. He was granted 
eligibility for access to classified information while on active duty in the Navy.  
 
 Applicant entered active duty immediately after graduating from high school in 
2006. After leaving active duty in February 2014, Applicant was unemployed for three 
months before being employed as a field engineer by a defense contractor in April 
2014. He has been employed as a field engineer by different defense contractors since 
then, except for a brief period of unemployment from May to November 2015 (Item 3. E-
QIP, dated April 4, 2017) 
 
 Credit reports (Item 8, dated February 22, 2018; Item 9, dated June 9, 2017) 
confirm, the following delinquent debts in the SOR that had either been charged off or in 
collection; charged-off credit union accounts to the same credit union for $18,194 (SOR 
1.a), $6,624 (SOR 1.c), $3,935 (SOR 1.d), $1.881 (SOR 1.f), $1,311 (SOR 1.g), and 
$602 (SOR 1.h); child support in collection for $12,028 (SOR 1.b); a credit card charged 
off for $2,697 (SOR 1.e); a medical debt in collection for $112 (SOR 1.i); and a cable bill 
in collection for $90 (SOR 1.j). Court documents confirm four judgments for apartment 
rent of $1,134 (SOR 1.k, (Item 4)), $1,028 (SOR 1.l, Item 5)); $3,894 (SOR 1.m, Item 
6)); and $1,275 (SOR 1.n, Item 7)). Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of 
the debts except for the medical debt of $112 at SOR 1.i and the communication service 
debt of $90 at SOR 1.j. He provided no explanation for why he denied these two debts. 
The delinquent debts listed in the SOR total approximately $35,565.  
 
 On the e-QIP, Applicant reported that he was in arrears on his child support 
requirements because of his periods of unemployment. He noted that a child support 
order was placed with his employer. While he mentioned that the periods of 
unemployment impacted negatively his ability to make child support payments, he 
provided no information or explanation to justify this conclusion.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant provided no information to explain, justify, or mitigate the delinquent 
debt. Applicant provided no evidence of any payments made on any of the debts. 
Applicant did not provide any information concerning his salary, expenses, and income.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
4 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly 
or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave 
in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports and court documents can normally meet the 
substantial evidence standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s 
admissions, credit reports, and court documents confirm the SOR delinquent debts. 
This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay debts shows an inability and history of not meeting his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established adverse financial issues, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issues. Applicant provided 
no documents for explanation and mitigation in response to the SOR and FORM. 
Accordingly, the available evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved or is 
resolving any of his delinquent debts. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The information in the case file shows 
that Applicant has been gainfully employed except for short periods of unemployment 
since entering active duty in the Navy in 2006. Regular employment for that many years 
appears to provide him the income and ability to pay his financial obligations. Applicant 
provided no information on his present salary or the status of his finances. He did not 
present information on contacts with creditors or efforts to establish payment plans. His 
lack of documented action results in his debts being numerous, ongoing, and recent. 
There is no information to verify his debts were incurred under circumstances making 
recurrence unlikely. Applicant presented no evidence that he received financial 
counseling.  
 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free. 
All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given his financial circumstances. 
Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, 
and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must 
show a systematic method of handling debts, and meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track 
record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Applicant did not present evidence of any debt payments.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient details about what he plans to do to address 
the debts alleged in the SOR. He did not state that he had a plan to pay his debts. He 
did not provide documentation to show proof of payments, correspondence to or from 
the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of debt disputes, evidence of 
attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of debt resolution. There is 
insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was unable to make any progress 
resolving his debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial problems are being 
 
6 
 
 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. His lack of reasonable and 
responsible actions towards his finances is a strong indication that he will not protect 
and safeguard classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate financial security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant served 
approximately eight years on active duty in the Navy. However, Applicant did not 
provide sufficient credible documentary information to establish that he took or plans to 
take reasonable and responsible action to resolve his financial obligations. Applicant did 
not demonstrate appropriate management of his finances and did not show a record of 
action to resolve financial issues. In requesting an administrative determination, 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In doing so, he must sufficiently 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his finances, 
adequately articulate his actions and positions, and provide facts to mitigate the security 
concerns. In short, the file as a whole does not contain sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
