 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01263 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 19, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 6, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 28, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on September 24, 2018. The Government 
offered five exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered three exhibits, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
 
2 
 
testified on his own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on 
October 23, 2018, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting 
documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as 
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 3, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old.  He is married with three children.  He has a high 
school diploma and some college.  He holds the positon of Hydraulics Technician with a 
defense contractor.  He seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to six separate creditors totaling 
approximately $32,000 that includes charge-offs, collection accounts, vehicle 
repossessions, and a Federal tax lien in the amount of approximately $18,500.  In his 
Answer, Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1.b., and 
1.f.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated August 1, 2017; and July 31, 2018, reflect that 
each of these debts were owing at one point.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)     
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in June 2017.  He has never 
applied for or held a security clearance before.  He testified that he and his wife are 
currently in the process of purchasing a house.  They are using his wife’s good credit to 
qualify for the house.  He has been steadily working to improve his credit standing.   
 
 From 2001 to 2005/2006, Applicant and a business partner operated an ice 
cream store.  Toward the end, he and his operating partner did not see eye to eye, and 
all of the company’s losses were tallied under the Applicant’s personal income tax as 
opposed to the business.  As a result of this, Applicant eventually incurred two tax liens.  
He states that he has since paid all of the back taxes and the liens have been released.  
(Tr. p. 33 -36.)   
 
 From 2009 to 2011, Applicant explained that he worked for a construction 
contractor.  At the end of 2009, he was injured on the construction site.  For almost four 
years, until 2012, he was unable to work in his field of expertise.  He explained that the 
injury left him with a broken bicep tendon in his left arm.  After it healed and was 
repaired, he was sent back to work sooner than he should have been, and he ruptured 
the left arm again.  It was still impossible for him to find work in his field and so he took 
on odd jobs and was self-employed.  Applicant states that while he was injured, he did 
not file income taxes because he did not owe taxes, and had very little income.  Since 
then, he states that he has filed all of requisite income tax returns.  In 2013, Applicant 
received a workmen’s compensation settlement award for around $50,000 or $60,000 
 
3 
 
dollars, which was compensation for both arm injuries.  (Tr. p. 51.)  During this period 
where he was underemployed, he incurred lots of financial problems as he was unable 
to pay his bills.  He states that he paid most of the debt with the settlement award, 
including some personal loans he had.  (Tr. p. 31.)  Applicant is also taking care of his 
critically sick father-in-law and is savings for his funeral expenses. 
 
 The following delinquent debts listed in the SOR also became owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $8,037.  This was a personally owned truck that Applicant used 
for work that was repossessed.  Applicant has not yet paid the debt but he plans to 
make arrangements to do so.          
 
1.b.  Applicant was indebted to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered against 
him in the approximate amount of $18,562.  Applicant states that he has filed all of his 
back tax returns and satisfied all of his back taxes and no longer owes the IRS.  A letter 
from the IRS for tax period ending December 31, 2017, shows a zero balance as of 
April 2, 2018.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)   
 
1.c.   Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection 
in the approximate amount of $181.  Applicant states that he is contesting the debt but 
has provided nothing documentary to substantiate this.  (Tr. pp. 37-38.)        
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $908.  Applicant believes he only owes about $400 and 
plans to make payment arrangements to pay it. 
 
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $4,298.  This is a truck repossession that occurred in 
2014/2015.  He explained that at the time he was struggling financially.  He and his wife 
had put a deposit down of $5,400 to rent a house that actually turned out to be a scam.  
The person renting the home, rented it to twenty different people, and Applicant lost his 
deposit.  The District Attorney filed a criminal action against the perpetrator and he was 
prosecuted.  The court ordered restitution for the Applicant in the amount of $5,400, but 
he never received it.  A letter from the district attorney’s office dated June 24, 2015 
confirms this incident.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)                
 
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $828.  Applicant settled the debt in the amount of $248.62.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)              
 
 Applicant submitted an Income and Expense Statement that he prepared which 
shows that after paying all of his monthly expenses, he still has discretionary funds 
available that could be used to pay those bills that he has not yet addressed in the 
SOR.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.  Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;    
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
  
 Applicant has incurred delinquent debts that he has been unable to pay in a 
timely fashion.  Admittedly, he suffered a serious injury on the job, resulting in long 
periods of underemployment, and he was a victim of a financial scam that took his 
rental deposit of $5,400 that was never returned to him.  However, other than his taxes 
he paid with his settlement award, he has not shown progress toward resolving the debt 
listed in the SOR.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
It is noted that Applicant has paid off his back taxes and has had the tax liens 
filed against him released.  However, Applicant has not made much progress toward 
addressing the delinquent debt listed in the SOR.  He states that he paid off and 
resolved many other debts he had with his settlement award he received several years 
ago.  Those debts, however, are not the debts listed in the SOR.  The debt listed in the 
SOR that remain outstanding totals in excess of $13,000, and Applicant has not made 
the effort to resolve them.  In fact, he has other priorities for his money.  Instead of 
paying his delinquent debt, he has chosen to save money and/or use it for other 
purposes.  He does not clearly understand the responsibilities that come along with 
possessing a security clearance.  He has not demonstrated financial responsibility.  
Concerning his delinquent debt, he has not acted reasonably and responsibly, and has 
not demonstrated good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  The Financial 
Considerations concern has not been mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
