 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 18-01122  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts. He failed to mitigate the resulting 
financial considerations security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 9, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant answered the SOR June 14, 2018, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.)  
 
On July 31, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 1, 2018, and received by him on August 7, 2018. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant timely submitted documents in response to the FORM (Response), and did not 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
object to its contents. I marked his documents, containing six pages, as Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A. Neither party objected to any exhibit. Items 1 through 8 are admitted into 
evidence; AE A is admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned this case to me on October 16, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and has an associate’s degree. He was married for about 
12 years and divorced since 2016. He and his former wife have two children. He was 
unemployed for four months during 2016, after which he was self-employed for about 
eight months. He began his current positon with a defense contractor in May 2017. His 
divorce and period of unemployment contributed to his financial problems. (Item 3)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2018, March 2018, and November 
2017, the SOR alleged five debts totaling $53,145, which became delinquent between 
2015 and 2018. Applicant admitted owing four of the five debts, but denied owing money 
on a delinquent mortgage. (Items 3, 6, 7, 8) The status of each debt is as follows. 
 
1. Applicant denied owing the charged-off mortgage account for $9,690 alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. He stated he was unaware of this debt or the creditor to whom it 
was owed. During an interview in January 2018, an investigator inquired about 
a $9,690 debt listed on Applicant’s credit report. Applicant acknowledged that 
he and his former wife owned a piece of property that was sold by a bank (FBT) 
in 2015 or 2016. He said he intended to investigate the $9,690 debt.1 (Item 5) 
This debt, which originated with FBT and was subsequently sold to the current 
creditor, remains unresolved. (Items 6, 7, 8) 
 
2. In his September 2018 Response, Applicant stated that he “just started paying 
$100-$150 a month” on the $16,992 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (AE A) The 
July 2018 CBR listed an outstanding balance of $17,232 on this debt. (Item 8) 
No documents were provided to corroborate payments are being made. It 
remains unresolved. 
 
3. Applicant negotiated a settlement for the $14,622 credit card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. He paid it in full in August 2018. (AE A at 2) This debt is resolved. 
 
4. Applicant negotiated a settlement for the $10,952 credit card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. He agreed to settle the debt for $1,674 and is making payments on 
the debt. (Item 3; AE A at 4) It is being resolved. 
 
5. Applicant did not provide proof that he paid or is resolving the $889 satellite bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, as stated in his Response. (AE A) It is unresolved. 
   
                                                 
1 The July 2018 CBR reported that FBT transferred or sold the mortgage debt to another creditor in 2018. 
(Item 8) 
 
 
3 
 
 
  Applicant resolved two of the five alleged debts. He did not submit evidence of 
financial or credit counseling, or that he sought other assistance to resolve his delinquent 
debts. He did not provide budget information from which to predict future solvency or a 
plan to address the delinquent debts.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable to meet financial obligations, which began 
in 2015 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under the above 
disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could potentially mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
 
5 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Three SOR-alleged debts are ongoing, unresolved, and total over $27,000. 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence from which to conclude that similar problems will 
not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a). He provided some evidence 
that the delinquencies were caused by a divorce and period of unemployment. Those 
were circumstances beyond his control; however, he did not provide evidence that he 
acted responsibly under those circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He presented 
no evidence of financial counseling or a budget. There are not clear indications that the 
three remaining delinquent debts, including a mortgage, are under control. Nor is there 
sufficient evidence that he made a good-faith effort to resolve them. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) 
do not apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.e. He presented evidence that two debts were 
resolved or being resolved in good faith. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis, and considered that 
Applicant is making some progress on resolving his debts. However, Applicant has 
unresolved financial problems and has not presented a financial plan for resolving them. 
Overall, the evidence creates doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability 
for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
