 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00799 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 19, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On February 10, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  (Government Exhibit 1.) On April 26, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 7, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 28, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on September 24, 2018.  The Government offered 
 
2 
 
six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits 
A through D, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on her own 
behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on October 23, 2018, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant 
failed to submit any additional documents.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on October 3, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 66 years old and is divorced a second time.  She has a high school 
diploma.  She is employed by a defense contractor is as a senior laboratory technician.  
She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified nine delinquent debts totaling in excess of approximately 
$90,000.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR.)  Credit reports of the Applicant dated March 7, 2018; and March 29, 
2017, confirm the debts listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)  Applicant 
began working for her current employer in about September 2016.  She has worked in 
the defense industry for the past 27 years.    
       
 Applicant testified that she retired from the defense industry, got married, and 
went into business with her second ex-husband in 2000.  Over time, their marriage and 
business went bad, so most of her money that she invested from her retirement account 
is now gone.  She is now divorced, and back to work.   
 
 1.a. and 1.b.  She explained that when she got married to her second husband in 
2000, she withdrew $50,000 from her 401(k) to invest in his tile business.  She also 
withdrew $25,000 to open up a sandwich shop for herself.  She ran her business for 
several years before she got sick and tired and closed it.  It was understood between 
she and her husband that they would both share the tax liability.  As it turns out, they did 
not file their income tax returns for tax years 2013, 2014 and 2015, because they did not 
have the money to pay their taxes.  When they divorced, neither of them paid the taxes.  
Applicant admits that she currently owes about $90,000 in back Federal and state 
taxes.  (Tr. p. 37.)  She has also failed to file her state income tax returns for tax years 
2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015.  Applicant provided a copy of her divorce decree that 
indicates that her husband was to keep the business and pay all debts associated with 
the tile company, including the tax obligations owed by the corporation.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit D.)  Applicant states that she recently made an appointment with the IRS to sit 
 
3 
 
down and go over her tax liabilities.  She states that since 2016 she has been paying 
$100 monthly toward the debt.  (Tr. p. 41.)    She states that in the past she was told 
that in order to hire an attorney to help her she needed $7,000 which she does not 
have.  She currently has a restraining order against her ex-husband for domestic 
violence.  (Tr. p. 40.)  She states that in 2015 he kept harassing her and damaged her 
thumb.  Applicant states that she still owes the attorney for fees for representing her in 
the divorce.       
 
 Other delinquent debts listed in the SOR also became owing: 
 
1.c. A delinquent credit card was charged off in the approximate amount of $1,796.  
Applicant claims that she has made payment arrangements of $100 monthly, but is not 
sure of the current status.  (Tr. pp. 48-49 and Applicant’s Exhibit B.)           
 
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a department store was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $1,310.  The debt remains outstanding.  (Tr. p. 50 and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)       
 
1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a department store was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $267.  Applicant states that she made payment arrangements of $86.89 
twice monthly to resolve the debt.  (Tr. p. 51 and Applicant’s Exhibit C.)       
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical debt was charged off in the approximate amount of $182.     
Applicant claims that she contacted the creditor and they were unable to find the file.  
(Tr. p. 52.) 
 
1.g.  A delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount of $118 remains owing.             
Applicant claims that she contacted the creditor and they were unable to find the file.  
(Tr. p. 52.) 
 
1.h.  A delinquent Federal tax lien was entered against her in 2017 in the approximate 
amount of $77,364.  Applicant is not sure of the status of this debt.            
 
1.i.  A state tax lien was entered against her in 2009 in the approximate amount of 
$15,609.  Applicant states that since March 2017, she has been paying the state back 
taxes in the amount of $100 weekly, totaling $400 monthly.  (Tr. p. 54.)   
 
1.j.  A Federal tax lien was entered against her in 2016 in the approximate amount of 
$3,534.          
  
1.k.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $150.          
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
4 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 As a result of her divorce, Applicant incurred delinquent tax liability, credit card 
debt and medical bills that she could not afford to pay.  Following her divorce, she has 
still been unable to pay her bills or her back taxes.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
   
  In regard to Applicant’s tax liability and delinquent debts, most of them remain 
owing.  At this time, she has not demonstrated sound judgment, nor has she made 
diligent effort to resolve her debts or even to learn enough about them to be able to 
testify about their status.  Furthermore, she does not appear to have the financial 
 
6 
 
resources available to pay them.  Based upon these facts, there is no evidence that she 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances.  There remain questions about her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
