 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 18-00280 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reason (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was 
taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 1, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for August 15, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any documentary evidence. The 
 
2 
record was held open until September 24, 2018, to permit Applicant to submit 
documents. None were provided and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on August 23, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.c through 1.f and 1.k through 1.o. 
She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.g through 1.j. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She is a high school graduate and has earned some 
college credits, but not a degree. She married in 2002, separated in 2004, and divorced 
in 2009. She has a 16-year-old child from the marriage. She has two younger children, 
ages 12 and 9, from a previous relationship. Both fathers terminated their parental rights 
and do not provide child support to the children. Applicant has been employed for ten 
years in the same field, but with different contractors.1  
 
 Although employed, Applicant attributed her financial problems to 
underemployment. In August 2018, her income was reduced by $700 a month. She 
testified that she is a single mother with expenses and did not realize the importance of 
having credit. Her father has made provisions for her children to be his dependents, so 
they will have medical insurance under his military retirement. Her parents help 
Applicant financially. Applicant has not had credit counseling, but has looked into the 
services. She intends on completing her associate’s degree next semester.2 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,820) and ¶ 1.c ($1,172) are collection 
accounts for student loans. Applicant testified she obtained the loans in 2010 to attend 
school. The loans were in deferment for a period. Prior to 2015, she had a payment plan 
of $300 a month. Later her salary decreased, and she was unable to meet the 
payments. She said she made inconsistent payments for about a year. She said she 
consolidated the loans in 2015, and in 2017 she enrolled in an income-based 
rehabilitation program for student loans and was required to pay $14 a month. She 
testified she has not completed the rehabilitation program. She provided a document 
showing a payment schedule for the program that was to begin in February 2018 and 
continue until January 2019. The balance listed on the student loan is $9,128. She 
testified that she made a lump sum payment to the Department of Education in the 
amount of $4,000 to $5,000 from her income tax refund. She is hopeful to have the 
loans in deferment when she resumes school in the fall. She did not provide any 
corroborating evidence regarding past monthly payments, the lump sum payment, or 
proof that she has made the monthly payments.3 The debts are unresolved. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-32; GE 3. 
 
2 Tr. 32-34, 51-57. 
 
3 AE A. 
 
3 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,228), an amount owed on a broken 
lease. She stated she did not break the lease. She spoke with a representative of the 
creditor to obtain paperwork. None was provided.4 The debt is unresolved. 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.d ($969) and ¶ 1.e ($400) are medical debts in collection. 
Applicant has not contacted the creditors, and they are not paid.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($207) is a utility debt in collection. Applicant testified she 
resolved it and would provide supporting documents. She did not.6 It is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant testified that when she and her husband married they held joint 
accounts. Her husband declared bankruptcy. She testified that many of the debts 
alleged in the SOR were included in his bankruptcy and discharged. 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions and 
credit reports from June 2017 and January 2018. Applicant stated that the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.g and 1.h belonged to her ex-husband and were discharged in bankruptcy. Credit 
reports show SOR ¶ 1.g was opened as an individual account in October 2010. SOR ¶ 
1.h is also an individual account opened in September 2013 and charged off in 2013. 
SOR ¶ 1.i was opened as an individual account in September 2013 and charged off in 
May 2016. SOR ¶ 1.j was held by a credit company in 2016. Applicant failed to provide 
documents to show the debts did not belong to her or that they were discharged in her 
ex-husband’s bankruptcy.7 These debts are unresolved.  
 
 Applicant admitted she owed the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.o. She 
did not have medical insurance at the time. She was told in January 2018, after 
receiving the SOR, that the creditor was willing to consolidate the debts and work out a 
payment plan. She has not followed through on establishing a plan, but intends to do 
so. She did not provide supporting documents.8 These debts are unresolved.  
 
 Regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($637), Applicant testified that the debt was 
resolved, but did not provide corroborating documents.9 It is unresolved.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
                                                          
4 Tr. 35-37. 
 
5 Tr. 38. 
 
6 Tr. 37. 
 
7 Tr. 39-46; GE 2, 3. 
 
8 Tr. 46-49. 
 
9 Tr. 49. 
 
4 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she has owed for several years 
that she is unable to pay or resolve. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt, which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to being a single mother, supporting 
three children, and being underemployed. She said that recently her income was 
reduced. She stated some of the debts were paid or resolved, but failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to confirm that or to indicate that she is addressing the delinquent 
debts. Her debts are recent and ongoing. She has not established a reliable financial 
track record of resolving her financial obligations. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude future financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Periods of underemployment and being a single mother may have contributed to 
Applicant’s financial problems. Both conditions may have been circumstances beyond 
her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant testified that certain debts were resolved, and she 
had made past payments on her student loans, but failed to provide evidence to support 
her statements. The evidence is insufficient to show she has acted responsibly in 
managing her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial counseling. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that there are clear indications that her financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve her 
debts. She has numerous delinquent debts and did not provide a viable plan for 
resolving them. Applicant lacks a financial track record of payments to her creditors. AG 
¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant disputes certain debts saying they are paid or she is not responsible for 
them. She did not provide evidence that she paid some debts. She did not provide proof 
to corroborate her disputes or to show what actions she took to resolve the disputes on 
some debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old single mother. She accumulated delinquent debts due 
to underemployment and providing support for three children. She acknowledged she 
owes certain debts, and asserted that others were discharged in her ex-husband’s 
bankruptcy. The debts alleged in the SOR are all listed as individual accounts in her 
name. She did no provide evidence of a plan to resolve the debts. Despite the record 
remaining open, no documents were provided to corroborate Applicant’s testimony. She 
is unable to pay her debts.  Applicant has not established a sufficient reliable financial 
track record. There is insufficient evidence to overcome the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs   1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
