 
  
  
1  
                                        
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )               ISCR Case No. 18-00037                                                                      
  )   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct. Eligibility for 
a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) furnished Applicant a set of interrogatories. Applicant responded to 
those interrogatories on February 26, 2018. On March 28, 2018, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security 
Executive Agent (SEAD 4), (December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
  
  
2  
                                        
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 4, 2018. In a notarized statement, dated April 
20, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on June 20, 2018. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2018.  A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on August 29, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
September 25, 2018. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, Applicant exhibits 
(AE) A through AE D, and Administrative exhibit I were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 4, 2018. I kept 
the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. She took advantage of that 
opportunity and timely submitted several documents which were marked and admitted as 
AE E and AE F without objection. The record closed on October 30, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied with comments all of the factual 
allegations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). Applicant’s comments are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior systems operator of a defense contractor. She 
has been with her current employer since 2016. She is a 1991 high school graduate. 
Applicant has never served with the U.S. military. She was granted a secret clearance in 
June 2005. Applicant was married in 1992, and divorced in 2015. She has two children, 
born in 1998 and 2002. 
 
 Personal Conduct 
  
From June 2005 until November 2012, Applicant was employed by a defense 
contractor as a proprietary systems specialist. Upon receiving an offer at a higher salary 
from another defense contractor (contractor B), she joined her new employer as a lead 
functional analyst in November 2012, and remained there until January 2015. The 
contract on which she was working was transferred to another defense contractor 
(contractor C), and Applicant remained in the same location as a project management 
support specialist and functional analyst working for contractor C. 
  
  
3  
                                        
During Applicant’s employment with contractor C, her supervisor – the off-site 
manager – verbally approved a system calling for off-the-record time management. Under 
that system, because working overtime could not be officially permitted, when an 
employee worked over an eight-hour day, those extra hours would be considered “comp 
time” and not included in the official timecard, but annotated in a personal record on a 
continuing basis. When “official” leave was not expected to be taken because of an 
absence from the workplace, an employee could dip into their reservoir of accumulated 
“comp time” hours in the personal record. Under that unofficial system of record 
management, the “official” timecard would register a 40-hour work-week unless the 
employee actually took approved annual or sick leave. The only requirements for off-the-
record time management were (1) informal supervisor approval, and (2) a continuing 
annotation of the employee personal record. Applicant maintained her personal record by 
recording extra hours worked and hours taken on pink post-it sticky notes by her desk. 
Once off-the-record hours were used, the particular post-it sticky note was discarded. 
Applicant contends that if she ever took time off that her overtime hours – the ones in her 
personal record of accumulated hours did not cover – she would use official leave time.1  
On August 16, 2016, a financial management analyst – the contracting officer’s 
representative (COR) on a particular task order – sent an e-mail to Applicant’s supervisor 
questioning Applicant’s excessive absence from work. The e-mail noted that Applicant 
was frequently absent from work, and that she periodically advised her colleagues at the 
last moment of her absences, causing government resources to be removed from other 
tasks to cover for Applicant. The COR requested a meeting with the supervisor.2 A 
meeting was held and an investigation conducted. The investigation revealed that 
Applicant frequently informed three different staff members, including the supervisor, of 
anticipated absences. Based on the investigation, rather than speaking up on Applicant’s 
behalf, Applicant’s supervisor recommended her termination.3 It does not appear that 
Applicant’s supervisor was ever questioned about the off-the-record time management 
system that Applicant claimed was approved by him. 
On August 19, 2016, as directed, Applicant went directly to the main office. She 
was not questioned about her purported excessive absence from work. Instead, 
contractor C terminated Applicant from employment for her failure to perform duties 
appropriately on a specific task order, to wit: (1) persistent falsification of timecard 
records, (2) failure to post time records in a timely manner, and (3) failure to notify her 
supervisor appropriately and on a timely basis when not coming into work. That letter was 
signed by Applicant’s supervisor, the same individual who purportedly authorized and 
approved of the off-the-record time-management system.4 A second letter, referred to as 
the Agreement, signed by the vice president of human resources, claimed that company 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated April 20, 2018; Tr. at 18, 34-36. 
 
2 GE 3 (Memorandum for Record, dated August 17, 2016). 
 
3 GE 3, supra note 2, at 2-3. 
 
4 GE 3 (Termination Letter, dated August 19, 2016). 
 
  
  
4  
                                        
C discovered 110 hours that Applicant billed but did not work, for which company C will 
be responsible to reimburse the client. In exchange for not filing any claims against 
Applicant, she was required to release contractor C for any claims Applicant might have 
against the company, and would prevent her from filing any charge or complaint with, or 
participating in an investigation or proceeding conducted by, the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal, state or local agency charged 
with the enforcement of any laws. The Agreement asserted that Applicant had had at 
least 21 days to consider the terms of the Agreement – an assertion that was patently 
false.5 At the time of the termination, Applicant had no advanced notice of the intended 
action, and she was never given any opportunity to explain the situation. Furthermore, 
although she begged for the opportunity to return to her work area to retrieve her post-it 
sticky notes to support her position, that opportunity was denied.6 Those post-it sticky 
notes – Applicant’s only documented evidence of the off-the-record time management 
system – were never returned to her, and it appears that an unidentified representative 
of contractor C destroyed them.  
Applicant reached out to several of her former colleagues at contractor C, seeking 
confirmation of the existence of the off-the-record time-management system. One of 
those colleagues – a member of the team that investigated Applicant’s actions at 
contractor C – recalled being told that she should register her comp time on her calendar, 
which she remembered being up to an hour per week to use for a medical appointment. 
Otherwise, she would have to take leave or leave without pay.7 Another former colleague, 
while not addressing the specific issue of off-the-record time management, did confirm 
that Applicant “worked late when the mission required her to do so . . . to make sure the 
work mission went smoothly and all required tasks were accomplished.”8 Neither of the 
former colleagues would admit any further knowledge of the off-the-record time- 
management system at contractor C because they did not wish to jeopardize their 
respective jobs or security clearances.9 
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) requires employers to pay their employees 
at least one and a half times their regular wage for every hour worked in excess of forty 
per week.10 The U.S. Supreme Court wrote that the “the prime purpose” of the FLSA is 
“to aid the unprotected, unorganized and lowest paid of the nation's working population; 
that is, those employees who lacked sufficient bargaining power to secure for themselves 
                                                          
5 GE 3 (Letter identified as Agreement, dated August 19, 2016). 
 
6 Tr. at 23, 38.  
 
7 AE E (Facebook Postings, dated September 25, 2018). 
 
8 AE A (Character Reference, dated June 25, 2018). Applicant stated: I’m not going to stop right in 
the middle of something, oh, I’ll do that tomorrow. That’s not how I work. I’ll finish the project I’m on or what 
I’m doing and then I leave.” Tr. at 37. 
 
9 AE F (Statement, dated October 1, 2018). 
 
10 29 U.S.C. §207(a)(1). 
  
  
5  
                                        
a minimum subsistence wage.”11 The Court explained that the law was passed because 
of the unequal bargaining power between employer and employee, and certain segments 
of the population required federal compulsory legislation to prevent private contracts on 
their part which endangered national health and efficiency and as a result the free 
movement of goods in interstate commerce.12 
Subsequent Circuit Court rulings have held that “if an employer knew or had reason 
to know that its employee underreported his hours, it cannot escape FLSA liability by 
asserting equitable defenses based on that underreporting. To hold otherwise would allow 
an employer to wield its superior bargaining power to pressure or even compel its 
employees to underreport their work hours, thus neutering the FLSA's purposeful 
reallocation of that power.”13  
If an employee, such as Applicant, has worked overtime without pay, he or she 
may bring a private FLSA action for damages. An unpaid-overtime claim has two 
elements: (1) an employee worked unpaid overtime, and (2) the employer knew or should 
have known of the overtime work. Knowledge may be imputed to the employer when its 
supervisors or management “encourage artificially low reporting.”14 
Applicant has shown both required elements. She worked overtime without pay, 
and her employer, or at least her supervisor, knew or should have known she worked 
overtime, because Applicant’s supervisor both encouraged artificially low reporting and 
squelched truthful timekeeping. He did the former by explicitly instructing Applicant to 
underreport her time by working off the clock, and he did the latter by advising Applicant 
to maintain an official time card reflecting no overtime to reflect zero overtime hours, to 
show fewer hours worked. The somewhat cryptic acknowledgement by one of Applicant’s 
former colleagues attests to some degree that the off-the-record time management 
system existed at contractor C. 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP on October 27, 2016, in response to a 
question about employment activities, Applicant reported that contractor C had fired her 
for being “out sick and out with sick kids,” a characterization interpreted by the DOD CAF 
that she deliberately failed to disclose that she was fired for persistently falsifying her 
timecards. Applicant denied that allegation and explained that despite what was written 
in the termination documents, her supervisor told her that she was actually fired for being 
                                                          
11 Brooklyn Sav. Bank v. O'Neil, 324 U.S. 697, 707 n. 18, (1945). 
  
12 O’Neil, at 706–07. 
 
13 Bailey v. Titlemax of Georgia, Inc., 776 F.3d 797, 802-803 (11th Cir. 2015). 
14 Allen v. Bd. Of Pub. Educ. For Bibb Cnty., 495 F.3d 1306, 1314-15, 1319 (11th Cir. 2007); 
Brennan v. Gen. Motors Acceptance Corp., 482 F.2d 825, 828 (5th Cir.1973) (“The company cannot 
disclaim knowledge when certain segments of its management squelched truthful responses.”). Cf. Reich 
v. Dep t of Conservation & Natural Res., State of Ala., 28 F.3d 1076, 1082 (11th Cir.1994) (“The cases must 
be rare where prohibited work can be done and knowledge or the consequences of knowledge avoided.” 
(alteration adopted) (quoting Gulf King Shrimp Co. v. Wirtz, 407 F.2d 508, 512 (5th Cir.1969))). 
  
  
6  
                                        
absent too often, and in her heart she knew she did not falsify her work hours.15 The next 
time she completes an e-QIP, although she still does not believe the basis for the 
termination, Applicant will say she was terminated for falsifying time cards, because “if 
that’s what they want to say then that’s what I have to accept,” along with the fact that 
she still disputes the basis.16 
Based on her experience with contractor C, now that she is in a position with 
another defense contractor, she has vowed to avoid the circumstances that led to her 
termination by contractor C. She stated “I don’t dare put any time on my time card that I 
don’t work, period. If I ever work over, I just don’t get paid for it.17 Her current deputy 
program manager advised her that she does not have to log into the time management 
system to account for every minute, but she says she has to because she cannot go 
through “this” again.18 
Character References 
 One of Applicant’s former colleagues, although reluctant to discuss the off-the-
record time management system at contractor C, was effusive in describing Applicant’s 
character and reputation. Applicant is a “very hardworking, honest and devoted parent 
and employee,” and “she has been a person of morals and integrity over the time we 
have known each other.” Applicant “has worked late when the mission required her to do 
so. . . .”19  
The deputy program manager/senior quality assurance manager at Applicant’s 
current employer has worked very closely with Applicant for the past two years. She is 
very well respected as a coveted source of knowledge and by the management staff as 
a dependable employee. Applicant often volunteered to work late, come in early, or come 
in during off-shifts to ensure the warfighter mission succeeded. Applicant’s work ethic has 
translated well to management to “always ensure operations come first and our mission 
succeeds.” He added “Considering what I’ve experienced working with [Applicant], I 
cannot imagine any scenario where her character should ever be questioned. Please look 
favorably in anything regarding work ethic and trustworthiness.”20 
The chief of plans and policy for the section where Applicant currently works, 
characterized Applicant as a person with integrity and morals, who is also reliable, 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 32; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 19, 2017), at 4. 
 
16 Tr. at 34. 
 
17 Tr. at 33. 
 
18 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
19 AE A, supra note 8. 
 
20 AE B (Character Reference, undated). 
  
  
7  
                                        
personable, and honest.21 Applicant’s ex-husband noted that she is “loyal to a fault at 
times, trustworthy without doubt and respectful of others at all times.22 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
                                                          
21 AE D (Character Reference, dated June 25, 2018). 
 
22 AE C (Character Reference, dated June 25, 2018). 
 
23 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
25 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate 
to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less 
than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”27  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
At the outset, I note I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, 
observe her manner and deportment, appraise the way in which she responded to 
questions, assess her candor or evasiveness, read her statements, and listen to her 
testimony. It is my impression that her explanations regarding her personal conduct 
issues are consistent and have the solid resonance of truth. 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including Applicant’s testimony, as 
well as an assessment of Applicant’s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the 
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Analysis 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:    
                                                          
26 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
  
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
 
10 
                                      
 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
As noted above, during Applicant’s employment with contractor C, because of an 
official working-overtime prohibition, Applicant utilized an unofficial, unauthorized, off-the-
record time-management system, to record her official time in the official time card and a 
personal record to keep track of her “comp time” for later use, if needed. Her participation 
in that off-the-record time management system was contrary to the official company policy 
and, in fact, was a falsification of the official record. In addition, in light of the notices of 
termination of employment submitted to Applicant on the day of her termination, and 
without considering Applicant’s explanations, there is evidence of a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations, as well as evidence of significant misuse of government or her 
employer's time or resources.  
 
When completing her e-QIP on October 27, 2016, Applicant reported that she had 
been fired for being “out sick and out with sick kids.” She later explained that despite what 
was written in the termination documents, her supervisor told her that she was actually 
fired for being absent too often, but in her heart she knew she did not falsify her work 
hours. The DOD CAF interpreted her e-QIP entry as a deliberate failure to disclose that 
she was fired for persistently falsifying her timecards.  
 
 Applicant’s comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely an inaccurate answer that 
was the result of oversight or misunderstanding of the true facts on her part. Proof of 
incorrect answers, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or 
state of mind when the falsification or omission occurred. As an administrative judge, I 
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is a direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
alleged falsification or omission occurred. I have considered the entire record, including 
Applicant’s initial and subsequent comments.29  
                                                          
29 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Applicant’s explanation for her submission, in my view, is that she essentially 
recorded what she thought was right, and that she had not: (1) persistently falsified 
timecard records, (2) failed to post time records in a timely manner, and (3) failed to notify 
her supervisor appropriately and on a timely basis when not coming into work. In light of 
this more persuasive evidence of Applicant’s actual intent, I conclude that, with respect 
to her response in the e-QIP, AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. As to the actual 
participation in the purported off-the-record time management system, AG ¶¶ 16(b), 
16(d)(1), and 16(d)(4) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) apply. Applicant worked overtime without pay, 
and her employer knew or should have known of the overtime work. As noted above, 
knowledge may be imputed to the employer when its supervisors or management 
“encourage artificially low reporting.” In this instance, there is evidence that Applicant’s 
supervisor not only knew that she worked overtime, but also encouraged artificially low 
reporting and squelched truthful timekeeping. He explicitly instructed Applicant to 
underreport her time by working off the clock, and he advised her to maintain an official 
timecard reflecting no overtime to reflect zero-overtime hours, to show fewer hours 
worked. The supervisor’s actions were in direct violation of the FLSA. Because of the 
zero-overtime policy, it was expedient for the supervisor to encourage the use of the off-
the-record time management system, theoretically minimizing expenses while 
encouraging mission completion. Under the system, both parties were accommodated. 
The employer could maintain its zero-overtime policy and reduce expenses, and the 
                                                          
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose past-due debts on a security clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
12 
                                      
 
employee could maintain leave and attendance flexibility, but with a loss of earned 
overtime wages. 
Once the issue of Applicant’s time and attendance was discovered by the COR, 
the honorable thing to do was for the supervisor to acknowledge the off-the-record time 
management system, rather than recommending Applicant’s immediate termination. 
There is reasonable suspicion that contractor C management also knew of the entire 
situation. It had a zero-overtime policy, and faced with a potential FLSA violation, 
contractor C refused to permit Applicant to obtain her off-the-record time management 
system annotations (the pink post-it sticky notes), and destroyed them. Applicant was not 
interviewed about her leave and attendance activities. In addition, Applicant was required 
to release contractor C for any claims Applicant might have against the company, and 
would prevent her from filing any charge or complaint with, or participating in an 
investigation or proceeding conducted by, any federal, state or local agency charged with 
the enforcement of any laws. This was exactly what the U.S. Supreme Court was 
concerned about when an employer wields its superior bargaining power to pressure or 
even compel its employees to underreport their work hours, thus neutering the FLSA's 
purposeful reallocation of power.  
Based on her experience with contractor C, now that she is in a position with 
another defense contractor, Applicant has vowed to avoid the circumstances that led to 
her termination by contractor C. She stated “I don’t dare put any time on my time card 
that I don’t work, period,” because she cannot go through “this” again. Applicant’s actions 
under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
 
13 
                                      
 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.30  
  
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s 
participation in an off-the-record time management system was contrary to the official 
company policy and, in fact, was a falsification of the official record. In addition, Applicant 
was terminated from employment for a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations, as well as 
significant misuse of government or her employer's time or resources.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior systems operator of a defense contractor. She has been 
with her current employer since 2016. She was granted a secret clearance in June 2005. 
Applicant’s reputation is that she is a very hardworking, honest and devoted parent and 
employee; a person of morals and integrity; reliable, personable, and honest; and that 
she worked late when the mission required her to do so. Applicant often volunteered to 
work late, comes in early, or comes in during off-shifts to ensure the warfighter mission 
succeeded. That reputation from several sources is clearly at odds with the one contractor 
C sought to spread. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her personal conduct 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
30 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
