 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00851 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information in response to the Government’s 
case to overcome the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 6, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background 
investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On April 6, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
decision without a hearing.  
 
On July 10, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on July 24, 2018, and he was informed he had 30 days 
from the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and 
to submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on August 
23, 2018, after Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I received this case for decision 
on November 21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $19,573 for 16 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.p). SOR 1.j addressed a $4,061 delinquent 
state income tax debt being enforced through a lien against Applicant. SOR 1.e – 1.i 
represent delinquent medical bills totaling $738. Applicant admitted, without explanation, 
each of the SOR allegations. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 All of the SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR; by 
his responses to financial questions presented through interrogatories from DOD CAF; 
by credit reports obtained by the DOD CAF in August 2016 and January 2018; and by a 
summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on June 26, 2016 (FORM, Items 
2 – 7) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since December 2014. From March 2000 until February 2014, Applicant was an 
employee of State A. In April 2014, he moved to State B, where he currently resides. 
Applicant was unemployed from February 2014 until May 2014, when he found a part-
time job he held, in addition to his current job, until August 2015. (FORM, Items 2 and 3) 
 
 Applicant was married from August 1999 until divorcing in August 2006. He and 
his ex-wife had twin children, now age 18. Applicant also has an 11-year-old child for 
whom he pays child support as required. (FORM, Items 3 and 7)  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his period of unemployment in 2014. 
During his 2016 PSI, and in response to DOD CAF interrogatories, Applicant stated that 
his current finances were sound and that he was meeting all of his financial obligations. 
He also averred that he would start paying off his past-due debts. He did not otherwise 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on seven enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 7). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
provide any information in response to the SOR regarding payment or resolution of his 
debts. Likewise, Applicant did not provide any information about his finances in response 
to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
4 
 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required). 
By contrast, none of the information presented in this record supports application of any 
of the pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. Applicant’s loss of income was, arguably, 
beyond his control, thus evoking AG ¶ 20(b): 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Nonetheless, Applicant did not present any information showing he acted 
reasonably under the circumstances. Additionally, he submitted no information that would 
require consideration of the other AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. The record shows 
Applicant’s debts are current, insofar as they are still unresolved; that he has not made 
any payments to those debts; that he has not sought any professional financial assistance 
or counseling to improve his finances; and that he has not paid his state tax debt. The 
security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s finances are not 
mitigated. 
                                                 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). My review of all of the available 
information leaves unanswered the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information that were raised by his financial problems. Because protection of 
the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts 
must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
