 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00819 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 3, 2016. On April 
17, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 9, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 25, 2018, and 
the case was assigned to me on August 15, 2018. On August 27, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 27, 2108. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and presented the testimony of one witness. He did not submit any 
documentary evidence. I left the record open until October 12, 2018, to enable him to 
submit documentary evidence. He submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old machinist employed by defense contractors since April 
2014. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from February 2006 to February 2013 
and received a general discharge under honorable conditions. He has held a clearance 
since June 2006 and is seeking to retain it. 
 
 Applicant married in January 2011. Around 2013, he and his wife voluntarily 
separated for about a year and then reconciled. (Tr. 42.) They have three children, ages 
eight, six, and three. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a full-time student and is not employed. (Tr. 22.) She served 
on active duty in the U.S. Navy for eight years. She received an honorable discharge in 
November 2016, and receives a student stipend of about $1,600 per month under the 
GI Bill. (Tr. 29-30.) She was discharged under the Navy high-tenure rules because she 
was not promoted to petty officer second class after eight years of service. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he was discharged from the Navy because he stopped 
caring about his military duties when he and his wife separated and were on the verge 
of divorce. He was late for work several times, insubordinate, received nonjudicial 
punishment, and was administratively discharged for his repeated misconduct. (Tr. 48-
50.) 
 
Applicant was unemployed from February 2013 to April 2014. While he was 
unemployed, he was a full-time student at a technical school from September 2013 to 
April 2014, received benefits under the GI Bill, and earned a certificate as a welder.  
 
 The SOR alleges a deficiency of $13,452 after repossession of an automobile 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); a credit-card account charged off for $6,481 (SOR ¶ 1.b); an overdraft of 
$887 from a credit-union account (SOR ¶ 1.c); a charge account charged off for $535 
(SOR ¶ 1.d); a medical bill referred for collection of $217 (SOR ¶ 1.e); and a cellphone 
bill referred for collection of $676 (SOR ¶ 1.f). All the debts became delinquent after 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
Applicant was discharged, and they are reflected in credit reports from September 2016 
(GX 2) and February 2018 (GX 3.).  
 
Applicant and his wife testified that they did not believe they owed the medical 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, because she was on active duty in the Navy when the debt 
was incurred, and they believed it should have been paid by TRICARE. The credit 
report from February 2018 reflects that the debt is disputed. (GX 3 at 2.)  
 
Applicant and his wife hired a credit-repair company about a year ago. The 
credit-repair company’s report reflected a medical collection account being handled by 
the company and that it was no longer being reported by the three credit bureaus. (AX 
A.) The report also reflected that the company was handling the four debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and that they were still reflected as delinquent by the credit bureaus. 
The cellphone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is not reflected among the accounts being 
handled by the credit-repair company. It was not reflected in the February 2018 credit 
report. (GX 3.)  
 
Applicant and his wife hired another credit-repair company in about August 2018, 
because they were not satisfied with the progress the first company was making. They 
have paid the second credit-repair company about $200. However, the second 
company has not yet provided them with a list of creditors to be included in their 
program and has not made any payments to the creditors alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 38-
39, 43-44.). 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is about $1,200 per week. He has about $2,800 in a 
savings account, and about $18,000 in a 401(k) account. His rent is $600 per month, 
and he has two car payments for $550 and $343. His net weekly remainder is about 
$700. (Tr. 54-56.) He keeps a bi-weekly budget. He and his wife have not received 
financial management counseling from either of their credit-repair companies. (Tr. 43-
44.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s premature discharge from the Navy 
was not a condition beyond his control, because it was the result of his repeated 
misconduct. His wife’s discharge from the Navy under the high-tenure rules was a 
condition beyond his control. However, he has not acted responsibly. Even though he 
has been employed for more than four years, he took no action to resolve his delinquent 
debts until he hired a credit-repair company about a year ago, three years after the 
debts became delinquent. He has admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and 1.f, but 
they remain unresolved. He recently hired a new credit-repair company, but he was 
unable to describe in any meaningful detail how this company will resolve his delinquent 
debts, and he admitted that the new company has not made any payments to creditors.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Neither of Applicant’s credit-repair companies are 
non-profit credit-counseling services. They are for-profit credit-repair services that focus 
on challenging credit reports and negotiating settlements. They do not provide the type 
of financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating condition. Furthermore, Applicant 
has failed to submit “clear evidence” that his financial problems are being resolved or 
are under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of payments, 
payment plans, or other resolution of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and 1.f. The 
fact that the cellphone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is not listed in the February 2018 credit 
report does not establish that the debt was resolved. The mere fact that a debt is no 
longer reflected in a credit report “does not establish meaningful evidence as to the 
debt’s disposition.” ISCR Case No. 15-00254 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but 
he disputed it at the hearing, contending that it should have been covered by TRICARE 
because it was incurred while his wife was on active duty. The February 2018 credit 
report reflected that Applicant had disputed the debt. I have resolved the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.e in his favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
