 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00199 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 17, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
    
 On May 7, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 5, 2018. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on August 9, 2018. A notice of 
hearing was issued on September 14, 2018, scheduling the hearing on October 3, 
2018. The case was transferred to me on October 2, 2018.  The hearing was held as 
scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6.  Applicant testified and offered seven  
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – G. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely submitted documents 
which were admitted as AE H. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 11, 2018. 
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a DoD contractor seeking to maintain a 
security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since May 2017. Prior to his 
current job, he has worked for numerous DoD contractors. He has held a security 
clearance since 2008. The highest level of education Applicant has achieved is a 
bachelor’s degree. He is married and has two sons, ages 27 and 23. (Tr. 8-9, 56-58; 
Gov 1)   
 
On April 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as part of 
a periodic reinvestigation. (Gov 1) A subsequent security clearance background 
investigation resulted in the  following SOR allegations: a $13,499 delinquent federal tax 
debt for tax year 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 8-11); a $38,708 delinquent federal tax 
debt for tax year 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 12-13); an $11,194 delinquent federal tax 
debt for tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 15-16); a $19,487 delinquent federal tax 
debt for tax year 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 18-19); and Applicant is alleged to have 
failed to pay his state income taxes for tax years 2008 and 2009. (SOR ¶ 1.e:  AE F). 
 
Additional allegations include:  three loans form a credit union placed for 
collection in the respective amounts of $9,578; $2,780; and $1,937 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g and 
1.h: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 11, 13). Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 
2007. The bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2007. 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.i:  Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5);  
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 1997 which was discharged in 
December 1997 (SOR ¶ 1.j:  Gov 6).  
 
In 1997, Applicant filed for bankruptcy, in part, because of his position as a 
contractor.  Applicant and his wife had to sell their house.  They made no profit from the 
sale of their home. In 2007, Applicant filed for bankruptcy because he was unemployed 
for about a year. They initially filed under Chapter 13, but converted it to a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant listed $661,517 in assets and $790,238 in liabilities.  The 
household monthly income was $6,945. The average monthly expenses were 
$10,390.94. Applicant’s household had a negative monthly balance of $3,445. Their 
largest debt was their mortgage. The home was foreclosed in conjunction with the 
bankruptcy. (Tr. 27 – 30; Gov 5; Gov 6)  
 
Regarding the delinquent federal tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d, 
Applicant was unable to pay his federal tax debts for tax years 2008 and 2009 because 
he was unemployed. Applicant’s wife filed the income tax returns. She testified that for 
tax years 2011 and 2013, she did not file a 1099 for her husband’s contracting position 
because she misunderstood the filing procedures for contract employees. As a result, 
they incurred large tax debts.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant and his wife entered into several installment agreements with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) beginning in 2009. The agreements covered tax years 
2008, 2009, and 2011. He and his wife paid $500 a month toward the federal tax debt.  
In April 2013, they stopped making payments towards the payment plan and hired a tax 
expert to submit an Offer in Compromise to the IRS. Mr. N., their tax expert, submitted 
an Offer in Compromise to the IRS. The Offer in Compromise was denied in December 
2013.  In February 2014, Mr. N. offered to file another Offer in Compromise on their 
behalf free of charge. In September 2016, Applicant and his wife discovered that an 
Offer in Compromise was never submitted.  At the close of the record, Applicant and his 
wife were researching various tax consultants with the intent to hire one to submit 
another Offer in Compromise. Aside from the IRS claiming their tax refunds, no 
payments were made towards the federal tax debt. In September 2017, they filed suit in 
small claims court against Mr. N. for failing to represent them. They were asking for the 
return of the $1,900 fees they paid him to submit the Offer in Compromise. (Tr. 34-41; 
AE A; AE B; AE C; AE E) 
 
Applicant claims to have paid the state income tax debt owed for tax years 2008 
and 2009.  A June 2015 statement from the state department of revenue indicates that 
their 2014 tax refund was applied towards their state tax debts for tax years 2010 and 
2008.  The balance on the 2008 state tax debt of $641 was paid in full.  Approximately 
$1,199 of the 2014 state tax refund was applied to the 2010 state tax debt leaving a 
balance of approximately $174. No proof was provided that the remaining $174 balance 
was paid. Applicant’s wife pays all of the bills as well as the taxes. Since 2010, they 
have had a tax preparer file the tax returns. (Tr. 31-33; AE F)  
 
Applicant’s wife took out the three credit union loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g. 1.h) that 
were placed for collection. She was an employee of the federal agency where the credit 
union was located.  She took out loans for expenses related to purchasing a house in 
2011. Applicant was unemployed from 2013 to 2014. His wife was laid off in 2013 and 
was unemployed for a year and a half. She could not afford to pay the loans, so they 
were placed for collection. Once they became employed, Applicant’s wife attempted to 
contact the credit union and offered to enter into a repayment plan to pay off the loans. 
She included a check in her letter. The credit union mailed back the check and informed 
her that they would not accept the check because all three loans were charged off. 
Applicant was listed as a co-owner on the accounts. No additional payments were made 
towards this debt. No attempts were made to find the current owner of the debt.  (Tr. 41-
43; AE G)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant provided a monthly budget. His and his wife’s 
combined net monthly income is $8,386.  Their total monthly expenses are $6,194.74.  
They have $2,191.26 left over each month after expenses. During the hearing, 
Applicant’s wife testified that they provide $850 a month to their son who is in college 
and $800 a month to their son who is currently unemployed. When asked about the 
status of the budget, Applicant’s wife claimed that she would find ways to cut corners. 
When her son finds employment, they will be in a better financial position. She does not 
believe that they need to attend financial counseling. They do not splurge on expenses. 
 
4 
 
 
They don’t gamble. She claims it is hard to recover from 14 months of unemployment. 
Applicant currently earns $113,000 annually. His wife currently earns $45,000 annually. 
  
Whole-Person Evidence 
 
 Ms. F., Applicant’s former supervisor from November 2013 to August 2015, wrote 
a letter on his behalf. She worked with Applicant for seven years. She states that 
Applicant has integrity. He is dedicated to his work and is “quite honest, professional, 
and reliable.” Applicant is a model team member. (AE H at 4)  A performance evaluation 
from 2012 stated Applicant met all objectives. (AE H at 5-11)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
 
5 
 
 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems including two bankruptcy 
discharges under Chapter 7 in 1997 and 2007.  He owes the IRS approximately 
$82,888 for tax years 2008, 2009, 2011 and 2013. He owed state income taxes for tax 
years 2008 and 2010. The SOR also alleged three charged-off accounts owed to a 
 
6 
 
 
credit union, with a total approximate balance of $14,295. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 
19(f) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
With regard to Applicant’s federal tax debts, the emphasis of the DOHA Appeal 
Board on security concerns arising from tax cases is instructive. See ISCR Case No. 
14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (reversing grant of security clearance and stating, 
“His delay in taking action to resolve his tax deficiency for years and then taking action 
only after his security clearance was in jeopardy undercuts a determination that 
Applicant has rehabilitated himself and does not reflect the voluntary compliance of 
rules and regulations expected of someone entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR 
Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance and emphasizing the applicant’s failure to timely file and pay taxes); See also 
ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance, and stating “A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”).  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control:  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. 
None of the debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because Applicant’s financial situation was adversely 
affected by his periods of unemployment and his wife’s periods of unemployment.  
These circumstances were beyond Applicant’s control and adversely affected his ability 
to pay his bills. However, this mitigating condition is given less weight because 
Applicant has not demonstrated he acted responsibly under the circumstances. While 
Applicant and his wife were on an installment agreement with the IRS, they stopped the 
installment agreement. They retained a tax attorney to submit an Offer in Compromise 
to the IRS. The first request was denied in December 2013. In 2016, they discovered 
their attorney did not timely file a second Offer in Compromise so they terminated his 
services. In 2017, they took him to small claims court. Since 2016, Applicant had two 
years to work out a payment plan with the IRS or attempt to submit another Officer in 
Compromise. While Applicant claims that he is taking his time hiring another tax 
attorney, the length of his inaction suggests procrastination as opposed to due diligence 
towards resolving his federal income tax problems. For this reason AG ¶ 20(b) is given 
less weight.      
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant did not take a formal financial counseling 
course. His debts remain unresolved.  
 
 AG & 20(d) does not apply because Applicant has not demonstrated a good-faith 
effort towards resolving his delinquent debts. While Applicant intends to pay his federal 
tax debt, he has not made a payments to the IRS since he stopped making payments 
on his payment plan in April 2013, with the exception of his federal income tax refunds 
being applied towards his federal tax debts by the IRS. Applicant did not actively 
monitor the progress of the Offer in Compromise even when he hired the tax attorney. 
The first Offer in Compromise was denied in December 2013. His tax attorney offered to 
submit another Offer in Compromise in early 2014. Several years passed before 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant and his wife discovered in 2016 that a second Offer in Compromise was not 
submitted. Since that time, they have not followed up with another Offer in Compromise 
or an installment agreement with the IRS.  Applicant states that he intends to hire 
another tax attorney to submit an additional Offer in Compromise on his behalf.  A 
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient to mitigate security concerns raised under 
the financial considerations. Applicant has not shown that he was making a good-faith 
effort to resolve his federal tax debts. 
 
AG & 20(g) does not apply because Applicant’s federal tax debts remain 
outstanding.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
employment history as a federal contractor. I considered Applicant’s and his wife’s 
periods of unemployment. I also considered Applicant’s history of financial problems 
since 1997 to include two bankruptcies and substantial federal income tax debt. As a 
security clearance holder, he should have taken a proactive approach towards resolving 
his federal income tax debts. For several years now, he has earned sufficient money to 
enable himself to enter into a payment plan with the IRS or hire an attorney to submit an 
Offer in Compromise. No steps were taken to resolve his federal tax debts. Security 
concerns under financial considerations are not mitigated.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.j    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
