 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00265 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 12, 2018, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on September 4, 2018, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on September 20, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were admitted into evidence. The Government’s discovery letter was identified as 
 
2 
 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered exhibits (AE) 
A through G, which were admitted without objection. The record remained open after 
the hearing and Applicant timely submitted AE H, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation with explanations. His admission is 
incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
various defense contractors since 2006 as an information technology (IT) analyst. He 
has held a security clearance, without incident, for 35 years. He served over eight years 
in the Army and was honorably discharged in 1991 for medical reasons. He has a high 
school diploma and has taken some college courses. He was married in 1995 and has 
two children.1  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant had a charged-off debt to a bank in the amount of 
approximately $66,429. The debt was listed in credit reports from June 2016 and 
January 2018.2  
 
 In approximately October 2014, Applicant was approached by a friend (JB) 
wondering if Applicant would be interested in making some extra money acting as a 
purchasing agent for an automobile company. JB was acting in such a capacity when 
he contacted Applicant. While continuing his principle IT job, Applicant decided to take 
JB up on the offer because the extra income would help with paying for his children’s 
college expenses. In October 2014, Applicant signed a “non-exclusive purchasing 
agency agreement” (PAA) with an automotive company (G-auto). According to both 
Applicant and JB, G-auto was affiliated with another automotive group, which was also 
involved with these auto purchases (KC-auto). The agent who signed the PAA on behalf 
of G-auto was MS. Under the terms of the PAA, Applicant was to purchase luxury autos 
on behalf of G-auto. G-auto would supply the necessary funds for Applicant to make a 
down payment and Applicant would then secure a loan to pay the remaining balance. 
G-auto or KC-auto would then provide funds to Applicant to pay the loan. Applicant 
would receive a “fixed fee” for each auto procured on behalf of G-auto.3 
 
 Between October and November 2014, Applicant purchased four autos under the 
terms of the PAA, three without incident. He ran into difficulties with the fourth 
transaction, which led to the delinquent SOR debt. On November 5, 2014, Applicant 
purchased a luxury auto (A1) from a local dealership for $86,325. The purchase of A1 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 22, 44; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 22, 25-28, 30-31, 34, 49, 56, 61; Answer; AE A. 
 
3 GE 3-4. 
 
 
3 
 
was financed as follows: Applicant was provided $20,000 by either G-auto or KC-auto, 
which he deposited into his bank account. He used that $20,000 to obtain a bank check, 
which was tendered to the dealership as a down payment. Applicant also secured a 
loan from the same bank in the amount of the remaining balance of the auto purchase 
(approximately $66,300). The auto was delivered to G-auto. Applicant was given a 
check by KC-auto, payable to Applicant’s bank, in the amount of $67,800 dated 
December 10, 2014. It is unclear when Applicant received this check, but he was 
instructed not to present it to his bank for 30 days. When he presented the check for 
payment to his bank, it failed to clear because of insufficient funds. It was at this point 
Applicant realized he was involved in something that was not quite right because when 
he contacted G-auto to inquire about the check, it had closed down. He then contacted 
local law enforcement. He never has been paid back by G-auto or KC-auto. He accepts 
full responsibility for the debt that he incurred because of this transaction. His total 
involvement as a purchasing agent lasted from late October to early December 2014, 
less than two months.4 
 
 The owner of KC-auto and MS (G-auto’s agent who contracted with Applicant) 
were indicted, convicted, and sentenced on federal bank fraud conspiracy charges in 
May 2018. Both were ordered to pay monetary penalties in excess of $5 million. JB, 
who recruited Applicant for this enterprise, was apologetic for involving him and 
corroborated Applicant’s claim that he was unaware of the criminal aspect of the 
enterprise. There is no evidence in the record that either Applicant or JB were 
suspected of criminal activity.5  
 
 In February 2018, when Applicant initially contacted his bank about repaying the 
loan, he was told by the bank that it was not coming after him for the money. There is 
no evidence in the record that his bank was pursuing the debt before Applicant 
contacted them. He insisted on entering a payment plan to pay back the charged-off 
loan balance. His bank confirmed the agreement in March 2018, which has him making 
monthly payments of $250 per month. Applicant documented his payments from March 
through September 2018. He intends to continue with his payments until this debt is 
resolved. Applicant’s credit reports show that he is current on all other obligations. He 
has a track record of paying under an installment agreement as shown by his payments 
and resolution of a tax debt from 2009 (not alleged in the SOR). Applicant disclosed his 
action as a purchasing agent in his security clearance application and during his 
background interview. This debt is being resolved.6 
  
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 34-37, 41-42; Answer (including attachments); AE A, C. 
 
5 Tr. at 23, 49, 56, 61-62, 65; Answer (including attachments: See, U.S. District Court docket documents); 
AE H. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-24, 45-48; Answer; GE 1-2; AE B-H. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The evidence showed Applicant incurred a large debt which he was unable to 
pay. I find both the above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant incurred his sole delinquent debt in 2014 when he became involved in 
a car purchase arrangement over a 30 to 60 day period that ultimately was a sham 
financial transaction. Although he should have explored the nature of what he was 
involved with in more detail, he accepted responsibility and initiated a plan to repay the 
loan he received as part of his involvement in the car purchasing business. He has 
made consistent payments since entering into an agreement to pay back the debt. His 
credit report reflects that he is current on all his other obligations. He is committed to 
making all remaining payments until the loan is satisfied, similar to what he did when he 
paid his taxes pursuant to an agreement with the IRS. He incurred this debt in 2014 and 
has not incurred any additional delinquent debt. The circumstances under which he 
became indebted are unlikely to recur and he has established a good credit record 
since that time. His current judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability have been 
established. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. Although there is no evidence of financial counseling, 
there are clear indications that his financial issue is being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies. His initiation of payments to the bank, even though delayed and the bank told 
him he would not be held responsible, is indicative of his good-faith effort to resolve his 
debt. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, his federal contractor service, the 
circumstances surrounding his indebtedness, his initiation of his repayment plan, and 
his strong financial record since 2014. I also considered that Applicant accepted 
 
7 
 
responsibility for his part in the sham financial transaction with which he became 
entangled.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph:   1.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
