 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case:  18-00899   
 )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 19, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 21, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On April 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 28, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on September 26, 2018. The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered eight exhibits, referred to as 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through H, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
October 9, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, and is engaged to be married.  He has a Bachelor’s of 
Science degree in Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an 
Engineer.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.  Applicant began working for his current employer in 2011, and has held a 
security clearance since 2014.  
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has engaged in criminal activity that 
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has engaged in excessive alcohol 
consumption, which often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant testified that he began consuming alcohol after graduating from college 
in 2005.  He estimates that he consumed alcohol about once a week at social 
gatherings, and never at home or alone.  He normally consumed three to four beers at a 
time.  He states that he very rarely drank to the point of intoxication.  (Tr. p. 41.) 
 
 Prior to 2017, Applicant had never been arrested.  On January 15, 2017, he was 
arrested and charged with Driving Under the influence of Alcohol and Driving While 
Blood Alcohol Level is .08% or More.  He explained that on the evening in question he 
was driving home after attending a concert, where he consumed about four beers, and 
then went to a bar, where he drank another four beers, for a total of eight beers over a 
four hour period.  Leaving the bar, Applicant was pulled over by the police and 
administered a breathalyzer.  Applicant had a blood alcohol level of .15.  Applicant 
believes that he passed the field sobriety test that was administered.  Applicant pled 
guilty to both charges, and was sentenced to four days in jail, ordered to complete the 
six month First Offender Alcohol Program, and was placed on three year probation until 
2020.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)       
 
 Five months later, on June 23, 2017, and before the first arrest was resolved, 
Applicant was arrested a second time for Driving Under the influence of Alcohol and 
Driving While Blood Alcohol Level is .08% or More.  Applicant stated that one day after 
 
 
3 
 
 
finishing work, he and two of his coworkers went to a bar for a few drinks.  (Tr. pp. 30-
31.)  Applicant felt that he needed something to lift his spirits since his first arrest and 
conviction were not reduced or dismissed as he would have liked.  As Applicant drove 
home, he was pulled over and administered the breathalyzer.  He states that his blood 
alcohol level was about .20.  (Tr. p. 32)  On March 5, 2018, he pled guilty to both 
charges.  He was sentenced to 94 days in jail, ordered to complete the six-month 
Multiple Offender Alcohol Program, and was placed on five years unsupervised 
probation until 2023.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  Applicant paid the court fines related to 
the offenses.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  Applicant has not completed the Multiple 
Offender Alcohol Program and remains on probation until 2023.  (Tr. p. 34.)  He 
continues to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings about once a week as part of 
the court-ordered program.  He also attends group meetings every other week, and in 
between those, has one on one counseling.  Applicant recently completed his in-home 
confinement in lieu of the full 94 days in jail, on July 10, 2018.  (Applicant’s Exhibits E 
and F.)  He has learned not to bottle up his feelings, which only make things worse.  (Tr. 
p. 37.)   
 
 Applicant testified that he does not have an AA sponsor, but does have his fiancé 
to talk to if needs to talk.  Applicant states that he last consumed alcohol in June 2017.  
He now knows for sure that he will not be drinking unless he knows that he has a ride.  
(Tr. p. 39.)  
 
 A letter from the Applicant’s program manager dated September 25, 2018, 
indicates that Applicant is considered to be a serious-minded highly responsible person.  
He performs a superior job, is on time, and is within budgetary constraints.  He is a 
respected leader within the organization.  He works meticulously and carefully protects 
classified information.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.) 
 
 Performance appraisals of the Applicant for 2016 and 2017 reflect favorable 
ratings in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and B.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to 
affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt 
on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted;  
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(d) violation of revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
 Appellant was arrested, charged and convicted on two separate occasions just 
last year with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol and Driving with a Blood Alcohol 
Level of .08% or More.  This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifications. 
 
The conditions set forth under AG ¶ 32 could mitigate security concerns (MCs) 
arising from Appellant’s criminal conduct: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not  cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
Applicant’s recent history of two arrests and convictions for DUI, occurred just 
last year in 2017.  He has not yet finished the court-ordered sentencing requirements 
and will remain on probation until 2023.  He has not produced sufficient evidence to 
establish that future criminal problems are unlikely. He has not established mitigation 
under MC ¶ 32.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
(c)habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
  
 The evidence shows that Applicant recently incurred two arrests, charges and 
convictions for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol.  Never before has he had this 
problem.  These incidents raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern  of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear  and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
 
 
7 
 
 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.  
  
 Applicant failed to introduce sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. Although it has 
not been determined if he is an alcoholic or is alcohol dependent, he has had two 
alcohol-related incidents just last year resulting in convictions.  He last consumed 
alcohol to excess in June 2017.  His conduct was irresponsible and dangerous.  He 
states that he now knows that if he is to drink again, he will make sure that he has a 
ride.  Given the recent nature of his drinking problem, more time without drinking is 
needed to show the Government that he will not return to his old habits.   ¶ 32 does not 
provide full mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant last consumed alcohol in 
June 2017, after being arrested last year on two occasions for Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol.  At this time, there is no strong evidence in the record to show that 
he will remain sober for any sustained period.  He has failed to present sufficient 
evidence of rehabilitation to overcome his heavy burden to mitigate his alcohol abuse.  
Overall, the record evidence raises doubts about Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:                      Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                      Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
