 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00698 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Johnny C. Cope, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 15, 
2017. On April 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 1, 2018, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on June 27, 2018. Applicant 
retained counsel, and the case was reassigned to me on August 15, 2018. On August 
27, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
the hearing was scheduled for September 26, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until October 12, 2018, to 
enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX H 
through N, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
October 3, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations, with explanations. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old shipyard supervisor employed by a defense contractor 
since April 2001. Before he became a supervisor, he was a machinist working on 
aircraft carriers. He has held a security clearance since August 2002. He served on 
active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1985 to March 1992 and received an 
honorable discharge.  
 
 Applicant married in February 1990. For as long as Applicant was married, he 
made a direct deposit of his paycheck, and his wife paid all the bills and filed their 
federal and state income tax returns. She filed the tax returns electronically, and 
Applicant did not personally review and sign them.  
 
 Starting around 2000, Applicant’s wife began suffering from asthma, and it 
progressed to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). By about 2009, she had 
difficulty breathing and was on oxygen, and she retired from her job as a paralegal. In 
September 2017, about the time that Applicant submitted his SCA, she told him that she 
had not filed their federal income tax returns for 2010 through 2016. Applicant had not 
personally filed a tax return since he was discharged from the Army in 1992, and he did 
not know how to file the past-due returns. With the help of his sister, who is a paralegal 
and a bookkeeper, he filed all the past-due federal returns on September 25, 2017. 
They were entitled to refunds for tax years 2010 through 2016. Applicant’s wife passed 
away in December 2017. (Tr. 15-24.)  
 
In February 2018, Applicant was notified by the state tax authority that their state 
income tax returns had not been filed for 2010-2016. (Tr. 22-23.) Applicant filed all the 
past-due state tax returns in March 2018 and was entitled to refunds for tax years 2010 
through 2016. (GX 2 at 8; AX A through N.) He timely filed his federal and state income 
tax returns for 2017. (Tr. 25.) 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
4 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income 
tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2016 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The security concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 This concern encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, 
and other qualities essential to protecting classified information. A person who is 
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in 
handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(c) “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”) and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file . . . annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns . . . as required”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 All three mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s failures to timely file 
his tax returns were recent and numerous. Arguably, he was negligent by not paying 
attention to financial and tax matters, but he understandably relied on his wife, a 
paralegal, to handle them. The returns became past due because of his wife’s illness 
and death, circumstances that make recurrence unlikely. When Applicant learned that 
the tax returns had not been filed, he promptly obtained the help of his sister and filed 
them. All the past-due federal and state returns were filed before he received the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army. He has 
worked in a shipyard and held a security clearance for many years. He was candid, 
sincere, remorseful, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
failure to timely file his federal and state tax returns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
