 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  18-00330 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 15, 2016. 
On February 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant 
answered the SOR on March 26, 2018, and requested a decision on the record without a 
hearing. On April 24, 2018, a complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven Items, was mailed to Applicant. He received the FORM on May 21, 
2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on September 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old and has worked as a statistician for a defense contractor 
since December 2013. He was married from 2002 until 2011, and he and his ex-wife have 
 
 2
two minor children. Applicant received an associate’s degree in 2010. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Navy from 1997 until 2011, and honorably retired from the U.S. Navy 
Reserve in 2017. He held a clearance while he served on active duty; however, in 2007, 
while he was experiencing financial difficulties, continuation of his security clearance was 
denied. In 2010, Applicant was granted a conditional security clearance. (Item 2 at 35; 
Item 3 at 3-5). 
 
Applicant’s 2007 financial issues, were the result of significant marital issues 
related to his ex-wife’s infidelity, and they ultimately divorced. Applicant claims his current 
financial issues are the result of his 2011 transition from active duty to civilian life. (Item 
2 at 13-14, 35; Item 3 at 3)  
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant has fifteen delinquent debts, totaling over $23,000. 
The debts became delinquent between 2011 and 2017. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7) In 
his Answer, he claimed several debts were resolved, should have been resolved, or were 
not his responsibility. He did not provide documentation to support his assertions that he 
is not responsible for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.n. 
(Item 1) 
 
The most recent credit bureau report (CBR) in the record shows that the student 
loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, totaling $11,139, had decreased to $8,552 as 
of December 2017. Applicant asserted in his Answer that he is participating in a 
rehabilitation program and has been making payments for an unspecified period of time. 
(Item 1; Item 7)   
 
In his 2016 SCA, Applicant indicated that he intended to contact a financial 
specialist1 to help him create a budget and address delinquent debts. In his August 2017 
personal subject interview (PSI), he admitted that he had not met with the command 
financial specialist.  
 
Applicant’s most recent credit report indicates he has a new $700 delinquent debt. 
(Item 7) Additionally, Applicant’s neighbor received a $1,000 judgment against him on an 
unknown date, due to a tree in Applicant’s yard falling onto the neighbor’s property. During 
his August 2017 PSI, Applicant admitted that he has not yet paid this debt. He also owes 
approximately $2,000 in delinquent property taxes.2 (Item 3 at 1-2) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”3 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
                                                          
1 Applicant claimed he intended to meet with a “command” specialist, but he did not specify if the specialist 
was associated with his U.S. Navy Reserve command or his civilian command. 
 
2 None of these issues were alleged in the SOR, and they will only be considered in assessing whether 
mitigation was established under applicable guideline conditions or the whole-person concept. 
 
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 3
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”4 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative judge 
must consider all available and reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”6 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”8 The guidelines presume a nexus, or rational 
connection, between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.9 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
                                                          
 
4 Egan at 527. 
 
5 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
6 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
8 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 4
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.10 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.11 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”12 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under Guideline F is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his credit reports establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of 
not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate those security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
                                                          
 
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 5
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous debts that have been delinquent for a number of years. 
He has other debts that became delinquent in the past two years, and the most recent 
CBR reflects at least one new delinquency, demonstrating that Applicant’s financial 
issues are ongoing and have not occurred under unusual circumstances.  
 
 Although Applicant is making rehabilitation payments toward his student loans, it 
is insufficient evidence to show that his finances are in good standing and he acted 
responsibly to address numerous delinquent debts. Applicant provided no evidence of 
credit counseling. Nor did he provide evidence to substantiate that he has a reasonable 
basis to dispute his responsibility for some of the debts alleged in the SOR. There is no 
evidence that he has resolved the outstanding property taxes. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) was not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
 6
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, including his long military service, I conclude that Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns at issue. Other than his student loans, he has not 
resolved, nor is he resolving, the alleged delinquent debts. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.o:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
