 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-01175 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dan Meyer, Esq. 
 
 
  ______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 19, 2017. On 
May 1, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 18, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 26, 2018, 
and the case was assigned to me on September 11, 2018. On September 14, 2018, the 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for October 11, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until October 18, 2018, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. At Applicant’s request, I extended the deadline for submitting 
additional evidence until October 23, 2018. He timely submitted AX F through I, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the single allegation of marijuana 
use from November 2010 through May 2017, but asserted that his conduct has been 
mitigated. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old software designer employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2017. He graduated from high school in July 1999 and has worked since 
September 2003 for various employers, including defense contractors, in jobs involving 
information technology. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis in his early 20s. He was treated by 
various gastroenterologists until about 2011, when he lost his medical insurance for a few 
months. In an effort to treat himself, he started using marijuana about twice a week, which 
kept his medical condition under control. He used it alone at home and not in social 
situations. He knew that marijuana use and trafficking in marijuana was illegal in the states 
where he resided. He learned in May 2017 that his marijuana use was contrary to federal 
employment policy. He immediately stopped using marijuana and stopped associating 
with the individuals from whom he purchased it. He reestablished a relationship with a 
gastroenterologist and now controls his colitis with medication. (Tr. 13-19.) He disclosed 
his marijuana use in his SCA and during an interview by a security investigator. (GX 1 at 
30; GX 2 at 6.) 
 
 Applicant was tested for illegal drugs and controlled substances on October 15, 
2018, and tests were negative. (AX F.) He was evaluated at an addiction treatment facility 
on October 17, 2018, where he was again tested for marijuana and controlled substances, 
and all tests were negative. A medical professional at the addiction treatment facility 
determined that no substance-abuse treatment was necessary. (AX H; AX I.) After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted a statement declaring his intent to abstain from illegal drugs, 
including marijuana, and agreeing that any violation will constitute grounds for automatic 
revocation of his security clearance. (AX G.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s supervisors regard him as skillful, hardworking, and dedicated. He has 
been candid with his supervisors about his drug involvement and has earned their trust 
and respect. He has been selected as a mentor for new employees. (AX B; AX C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 
4 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
 
5 
 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; . . . 
[and] (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Both mitigating conditions are established. Applicant stopped using marijuana as 
soon as he learned that it was incompatible with employment by a defense contractor. He 
stopped his marijuana involvement before he submitted his SCA and well before receiving 
the SOR. There is no evidence that he was addicted. He acknowledged his marijuana 
use and was evaluated by a medical professional, who determined that he did not need 
substance-abuse treatment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has been candid about his marijuana 
involvement throughout the security-clearance process. He was sincere and credible at 
the hearing. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
