 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-01085 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 3, 2016. On April 25, 
2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent 
her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 28, 2018, 
and the case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018. On the same day, the Defense 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 27, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until October 18, 2018, to enable her to submit 
additional documentary evidence. At her request, I extended the deadline until October 
25, 2018. She timely submitted AX G through GG. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on October 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old office manager and facility security officer employed by 
a defense contractor since December 1999. (Tr. 24.) She has held a security clearance 
since 2006. (Tr. 24.)  
 
Applicant married in June 1971, divorced in March 1985, remarried in July 1985, 
and was widowed in December 2012. She has four adult children. She received an 
associate’s degree in May 1994. 
 
 The SOR alleges a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, filed in 2012 and dismissed in May 
2014, and 15 delinquent debts totaling about $22,000. The bankruptcy and delinquent 
debts are reflected in credit reports from June 2016 (GX 2) and April 2018 (GX 3).  
 
 In May 2018, Applicant withdrew $35,000 from her 401(k) retirement account to 
resolve her delinquent debts. She paid about $10,000 in taxes on the withdrawal. She 
used $16,000 to resolve her delinquent debts and put $9,000 in a savings account to 
take care of unforeseen expenses. She has about $40,000 remaining in her 401(k) 
retirement account. (Tr. 27.) 
 
The evidence concerning the allegations in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in July 2012 and dismissed in May 
2014. The bankruptcy involved about $119,000 in debts. Applicant’s husband had two 
credit cards solely in his name, with balances of about $15,000 each. He also opened 
two credit-card accounts in Applicant’s name. Applicant had about $20,000 in credit-
card debt in her own name. When Applicant’s husband retired from the Army, he 
designated his children from a previous relationship as the beneficiaries for his death 
benefits, but did not include Applicant among the beneficiaries. (AX E.) When he 
passed away after a long illness, leaving Applicant with substantially reduced income, 
she could not afford to make the payments to the bankruptcy trustee, and the 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
bankruptcy was dismissed. (Tr. 16-17.) The consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.h 
were included in the bankruptcy and remained unresolved after the bankruptcy was 
dismissed. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: credit-card account charged off for $6,801. In May 2018, 
Applicant made a payment agreement providing for an initial payment of $1,000, and 
monthly payments of $100. On October 9, 2018, she settled this debt for $3,770. (AX H; 
AX GG.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: credit-card account charged off for $6,263. The creditor cancelled 
this debt on December 31, 2016, and issued an IRS Form 1099. Applicant included the 
amount of the forgiven debt in her federal income tax return for tax year 2016. (AX I; Tr. 
18.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶1.d-1.h: credit-card accounts referred for collection of $3,860; 
$2,698; $1,531; $1,117; and $423. Applicant paid these debts in June 2018. (Tr. 41; AX 
J-N.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.p: medical bills for $319, $124, and various amounts less than 
$100. Applicant paid these bills in May 2018. (Tr. 42; AX O.) 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is about $880 per week. She owns her home and has 
monthly mortgage payments of $1,504. She has no car payments. She uses a 
spreadsheet to track her income and expenses. She has virtually no net monthly 
remainder. (Tr. 24-29.) 
 
 Applicant has encountered several medical problems since her husband’s 
demise. She was treated for skin cancer in May 2014. (Tr. 38.) She underwent an 
excision of a benign tumor on her upper back and shoulder in March 2015. (AX Q-S.) 
She had a stroke in March 2015 and was unable to work for a week. (Tr. 38-39.) She 
underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy in June 2015. (AX X.) She underwent carotid 
artery stenting in March and April 2016. (AX P.) She takes medication for atrial 
fibrillation and hypertension. (AX AA.) She has TRICARE medical insurance but no 
private insurance. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 The vice-president of the contractor by whom Applicant is employed considers 
her “a vital part of this organization.” He states that he has “complete trust in her and 
her character.” The vice-president apparently was familiar with Applicant’s financial 
history, and he commented, “We also understand that sometimes things happen that 
are out of our control. Meaning what our spouses do with our finances.” (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
4 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at and after the hearing 
establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless 
of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were numerous, 
recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. The evidence of the circumstances preceding the 
bankruptcy filing in July 2012 is sparse, but they strongly suggest excessive spending 
and credit-card debt on the part of Applicant and her husband as well as fraud by her 
husband. However, resolution of those debts by bankruptcy was thwarted by conditions 
largely beyond her control, i.e., the death of Applicant’s husband and his decision to 
give all his death benefits to his children instead of Applicant. Applicant’s medical 
problems were also conditions beyond her control, but they appear to have had minimal 
effect on her ability to remain employed. Her medical debts were covered by insurance, 
and the amounts of the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.p indicate that the debts 
were copayments. Initially, Applicant did not act responsibly. Except for the credit-card 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, she took no significant action to resolve her debts until May and 
June 2018, after she received the SOR. She was overwhelmed by the loss of her 
husband, his failure to provide her with survivor’s benefits, her drastic loss of income, 
and her persistent medical problems. However, the SOR apparently gained her 
attention, and she has since acted responsibly by using the resources from her 401(k) 
retirement account to resolve all her debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established. Except for the counseling required by the 
bankruptcy court in 2012, Applicant has not received any financial counseling. However, 
her financial problems are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant has settled or paid all the debts alleged in 
the SOR.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has been employed by a defense contractor since 1999 and held a 
security clearance since 2006. Her supervisor trusts her and is aware that her financial 
problems were caused, at least in part, by the financial irresponsibility of her deceased 
husband. Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
