1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 18-01708 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. This decision is based on the adjudicative guidelines 
effective June 8, 2107. 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) on September 19, 2018. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on October 1, 2018. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
11/30/2018
 
2 
 
 
from receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and he 
provided a 33-page response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits identified as 
Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on November 14, 2018.  
  
 
 The SOR contains one allegation that Applicant is indebted to DFAS-CL on an 
account that has been charged off in the approximate amount of $36,230. Defense 
Finance Accounting Service (DFAS) is the sole creditor at issue. Applicant answered 
this single allegation on June 17, 2018, admitting that he is indebted to DFAS but 
denying that he has failed to live within his means, to satisfy debts, and to meet his 
financial obligations. He also attached a January 20, 2018 three-bureau credit report to 
his answer.3 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
                      .    
   Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from high school in 2002 and completed 
some college courses. He earned a Naval Reserve Officers Training (NROTC) 
scholarship through college from 2002 to 2006, but he did not obtain a degree or take a 
commission in the military. Therefore, he was required to pay back some of the 
scholarship money pursuant to its terms. He has never been married and reports no 
children. He has been employed as a system architect for a federal contractor since  
2011. Before that, his SCA reflects that he was employed full time in various positions 
since 2007, with only short periods of unemployment lasting two or three months.  
 
Applicant reports no military service. He applied for a previous security clearance 
in December 2008, but Defense Security Services (DSS) denied it without explanation 
and the contract ended anyway.  He is applying for a position of trust for the first time. 
He reported no financial problems in section 26 of his December 2, 2016 Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (Security Clearance Application) (SCA). However, in his 
personal subject interview (PSI) on January 19, 2018, with an office of personnel 
management (OPM) investigator, he disclosed that he lost interest in military service 
while he attended college. He was sent to a peer review board and lost his scholarship. 
His commanding officer gave Applicant the option of enlisting in the Navy or paying the 
NROTC scholarship money back in accordance with the terms of the scholarship. He 
surmised that his earlier 2008 SCA was denied because he owed money to Defense 
Finance Accounting Service (DFAS) for the scholarship.5  
   
                                                          
2 Unless otherwise indicated, the findings of fact were derived primarily from Applicant’s Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) (Security Clearance Application) (SCA) dated December 2, 2016 
(Item 3), and his personal subject interviews (PSI) on January 18, 2018, and March 5, 2018 (Item 5). 
 
3 Paragraph 4.3 of this credit report shows that the delinquent debt to DFAS was closed, and Applicant 
has no new delinquent debts.  
 
5 Item 5, p. 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
            In his June 18, 2018 PSI, Applicant stated that DFAS contacted him in 2007 after 
he left college. DFAS wanted him to pay $500 per month but he could not afford that 
much. No action was taken and Applicant tried to call DFAS twice, but was told that his 
account could not be found in their system.6 He continued to receive letters from DFAS 
for about a year and a half, but he ignored them. Then, he heard nothing until 2014.7 He 
never paid DFAS. 
 
  In a September 10, 2018 e-mail from Applicant to Department Counsel, he stated 
that he had conversations with DFAS in 2011 stemming from a letter that he received 
threatening to move his account to wage garnishment, while his income tax refunds 
were already being seized and applied to his DFAS debt. (Item 6) He told the DFAS 
representative that he could not afford $300 per month payments as requested. He 
agreed to $225 payments, but could not keep up with them, making only six payments  
from April to November 2011, out of ten that he agreed to make. When Applicant tried to 
call DFAS to find out his balance, the lady answering the phone tried to look up his 
account and said he did not have one. So, Applicant stopped paying on this debt. 
Applicant provided no documentation to substantiate these phone calls or any dispute of 
the debt. He stated “I have the ability to pay the $300/ month, but I cannot in good 
conscience, funnel $300/ month into a website where I have no account, cannot see my 
balance, and cannot correlate that data to ensure my payment is being applied to that 
balance.” (Item 6)  
 
  Applicant responded to the FORM on October 11, 2018, and provided 
supplemental documentation including: three pages of e-mail correspondence with 
DFAS; four favorable character reference letters; five years of positive performance 
reviews (2014 – 2018); a one-page screenshot from pay.gov; and seven pages of 
receipts from 2011 and 2018 from pay.gov website. The latter receipts reflect six 
payments of $225 to DFAS from February 2011 to November 2011, and one $300 
payment to DFAS on July 17, 2018. Applicant has documented payments totaling 
$1,650 toward this $36,230 debt that he has known about since 2007.  
 
          Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
                                                          
6 Item 5, p. 3. 
 
7 Item 5, PSI of March 5, 2018.  
 
4 
 
 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a [trustworthiness] concern insofar as it may 
result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted to the single delinquent debt owed to DFAS alleged in the 
SOR totaling over $36,230. This is a longstanding debt, as evidenced by his testimony 
about the numerous letters he received from DFAS in 2007-2008, and the April 2017 
credit bureau report, which reflects that it was opened in 2007, and the last activity 
occurred in November 2011. He admits to ignoring the earlier letters from DFAS in 2007 
– 2008, and he took no action until 2011. Then, he failed to fulfil the terms of his 
repayment agreement with DFAS, making only six of the 10 payments he agreed to. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
6 
 
 
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant disclosed that he owed a delinquent debt to DFAS in section 26 of his 
SCA. He does not dispute or deny the delinquency, which he was aware of since 2007. 
Yet, he produced no documentation to show sustained payments or progress on this 
delinquent debt aside from the six payments of $225 in 2011, and one payment of $300 
made in August 2018 on the eve of the hearing. Then, he just stopped making 
payments based on a putative phone conversation with an anonymous clerk at DFAS.  
His efforts were too little, too late. The single delinquency alleged in the SOR is recent 
and ongoing. Arguably, his short periods of unemployment were conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control. Yet, he has not demonstrated that he has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He provided no evidence of financial counseling, good-faith efforts to 
repay DFAS, or a budget to show that his financial problems have been resolved or are 
under control. None of the mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.  
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
 
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1. a:                                Against Applicant 
 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a  
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
