                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ---------------------------------                   )       ISCR  Case No.  18-00694          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Bruno Katz, Esq.                    
_____________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations and personal
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 
Statement of Case
On March 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4).  
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 26, 2018, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 14, 2018. The case was scheduled for hearing on
July 23, 2018. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits. (GEs 1-5) Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and nine  exhibits. (AEs A-I) The transcript was received
on August  1, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a child support court order
crediting Applicant with arrearage payments. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three
days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant provided a cover email and documented copy
of a State A court report and recommendation on motion to terminate income withholding
order. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as AEs L-M.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated two delinquent child support
arrearage accounts: one in State A (SOR ¶ 1.a) for $23,049 and one in State B (SOR ¶
1.b) for $13,555. Allegedly, both of these listed debts remain outstanding. Under
Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified material facts in the electronic questionnaires
for electronic investigations processing (e-QIP) he completed in November 2015 by
denying any delinquent child support payments within the past seven years.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to awareness of a past child
support arrearage in State A, but claimed he was up to date with his payments at the
time he completed his e-QIP in November 2015. He claimed that in contacts with State A
officials in 2017, he was told he was in compliance with the state’s withholding order by
paying current child support payments ($1,041). He further claimed he has a payment
plan to address his arrearage which will bring his total monthly payments to $1,241
under the state’s withholding order that will remain in place until November 2019.
Addressing the allegations covering child support arrearage in State B, Applicant
admitted awareness of this 2004 withholding order at the time he completed his
November 2015 e-QIP, but denied being told of being behind with his withholding order
payments. He claimed he was told by his military retirement payroll office that his
withheld pay was being misdirected to State A to cover the child support arrearage in
that state. He further claimed that he is working with State A to generate a double order
of child support payments to State A redirected to State B to bring his withheld payments
in that state into compliance.
Applicant denied falsifying his November 2015 e-QIP. He denied any prior
knowledge that his withheld child support payments were being misapplied.  He claimed
2
that he changed the coverage applications once he learned of the mistaken allocation of
this payments from the OPM investigator who interviewed him in August 2017.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old IT network operations team leader for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR are
denied and will be addressed with findings that follow.
Background
Applicant married in March 1986 and divorced in February 1995. (GEs 1 and 3 and
A-B)  He remarried in September 1997 and divorced in April 2010. (GEs 1 and 3 and AE
B) Applicant married his current wife in August 2013 and has no children from this
marriage. 
Identification of Applicant’s children and their respective ages is a bit confusing and
complicated by inconsistencies, omissions, and revisions of the information he provided in
his two e-QIPS and earlier February 1995 DD 398, his OPM interview summary, and his
hearing testimony about his children and their ages. (GEs 1-3 and AE B; Tr. 151-152) In
the first e-QIP he provided in June 2015, he omitted the names and ages of all of his
children. (AE B) In a revised e-QIP he completed in November 2015, he listed four
children from his first marriage (ages 30, 24, 21, and 18) and one stepdaughter (age 26).
In an ensuing interview with an OPM investigator in August 2017 he identified the four
children he named in his November 2015 e-QIP, as well as another adult stepchild
(previously identified in his DD 398) from his first marriage, but no other children from
either of his first two marriages.  (GEs 2-3)
Asked to identify his children and their ages at hearing, Applicant identified the
minor daughter he listed in his revised e-QIP from his first marriage as being then over
the age of 18. (Tr. 151) And, he identified two other minor children (both under the age of
18) from his second marriage, who are covered by his still enforceable child support
withholding orders in State A and State B, respectively. (Tr. 151-152) Applicant continues
to provide child support for these two remaining minor children under the respective
withholding orders of these two states. (GE 3 and AE’s H-I; Tr. 151-152) 
Applicant reported no educational credits within the past ten years or years prior.
(GEs 1 and 3 and AE B) He enlisted in the Navy in September 1982 and served ten years
of active duty. (GE 3) Between September 1992 and October 2002 he served in the 
Inactive Reserve  before his retirement and honorable discharge in October 2002 with 20
years of combined service. (GEs 1 and 3; Tr. 88-89). (GE 3) He held a security clearance
throughout his Navy career. (GE 1; Tr. 89-90)
Since November 2015, Applicant has been employed on a full-time basis by his
current employer. (GEs 1 and 3; Tr. 26-34, 43-45) Prior to his full-time hire by his current
employer, he worked part time for his current employer’s parent company as a radio
3
frequency technician. Between March 2005 and September 2009, he worked for other
employers as a shop supervisor. (GEs 1 and 3 and AE B; Tr. 43-45, 87-88)
Applicant’s finances
Credit reports reveal that Applicant accumulated delinquent child support balances
dating to April 2013 in State A totaling $23,049 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and delinquent child support
balances totaling $13,555 in State B (SOR ¶ 1.b) (GE 5) Beginning in September 2012,
Applicant agreed to a withholding order with State A’s child support division. (AEs C, E-F
and L-M) Terms of withholding were $1,041 a month for current support and $200 a
month for the accrued arrearage (more than 12 weeks owed) for a total of $1,241 a
month. (AEs C-E and I; Tr. 112-115)  In State B, Applicant’s monthly payroll deductions
total $781. (AEs D-E; Tr. 142-144) Previously, both State A and State B garnished
monthly his military retirement account. (AEs C, E, and I; Tr. 108-109) 
Currently, both State A and State B child support orders are funded by voluntary
payroll deductions. (GEs C-E and G-I; Tr. 114-117) While only one of Applicant’s children
was initially covered by State A’s withholding order, his monthly payment terms of $1,241 
have not changed and will not change until the entire arrearage is satisfied. (Tr. 142-144)
In State B, only one child (still a minor) is currently covered by the state’s child support
withholding order and his monthly payments of $781 will not change either until the
balance is sastisfied. (AEs D-E and H; Tr. 99-101, 142-144, 151-152) 
Following his divorce of his first spouse in 2004, Applicant became delinquent with
his court-approved child support payments for his oldest children residing in State B.
(GEs 1 and 3-5 and AE D-E and H; Tr. 54-58) State B payment records document
accrued arrearage between November 2004 and March 2018 of $13,555. (AEs D-E and
H; Tr. 57-60, 99-100, 116-118) 
Until he was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in August 2017, Applicant was working under the mistaken
impression that the money withheld from his pay to cover child support arrearage in
States A and B would be allocated on a pro-rata basis between State A and State B. (GE
3; Tr. 101-110) Once he was asked about child support delinquencies by the interviewing
OPM agent, he checked with the child support divisions of States A and B, respectively,
and learned that all of his withheld military retirement funds were being disbursed to State
A only. (AEs C and H; Tr. 103-104, 110-113, 120-121, and 143-144) He was assured by
both child support divisions that the mistaken allocations would be reversed to correct
misapplied withheld funds to State A that rightfully should have been applied to State B’s
delinquent child support balance . (AEs G-H; Tr. 120-123) 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission documented the correct allocation of withheld
child support arrearage for State A, and his State B arrearage has since been brought
current to reflect the correct arrearage allocation. (AEs D, H, and L-M; Tr. 57-59, 105-106,
and 116-117) Applicant hopes to complete his child support arrearage for State B by
2020. (Tr. 104, 147-148)
4
In May 2018, State A verified that Applicant had satisfied his child support
arrearage to that state and no longer required withholding. (AEs J-K) Payment records of
State A and State B confirm that Applicant is current with all of his child support and has a
bi-weekly remainder of $250. (AEs D and G-J; Tr. 105-106) He expects his earnings to
increase with his expected promotions to senior network operations team leader,
depending on the outcome of his proceeding. (Tr. 26-32, 146-147) 
E-QIP omissions
Applicant completed two e-QIPs, one in June 2015 and another in November
2015. (GE 1 and AE B; Tr. 97-98, 101-103) In his first e-QIP of June 2015 he listed his
withholding order for State A, but not for State B. (GE 1 and AE B) After completing his
June 2015 e-QIP (AE B), he received a July 2015 email from his facility clearance office
(FC) informing him of breaches in OPM’s data base that could adversely affect submitted
e-QIPs. (AE F; Tr. 94-95, 110). 
Based on this received information from his FC, Applicant submitted an updated e-
QIP in November 2015. (GE 1). In this follow-up e-QIP, he mistakenly assumed all of his
previous information was incorporated in his revised November 2015  e-QIP and omitted
information about his withholding orders. (Tr. 94-99) 
Applicant attributed his e-QIP omissions to inadvertence with respect to his state’s 
child support delinquencies and unawareness of his being then delinquent with any of his
State B’s child support payments. (GE 3; Tr. 52-53, 98, 103-104, 107-108, and 112-113)
Because he was never afforded an earlier opportunity by the OPM investigator who
interviewed him in August 2017 to voluntarily explain his payment history with States A
and B, he was never in a position to identify the mistaken allocations in his State A
withholding order and take corrective measures. (GE 3 and AEs C and H-J; Tr. 98-99,
102-105, and 131-134) 
Applicant’s explanations are corroborated and substantiated by his hearing
testimony and voluntary responses he provided the OPM investigator who interviewed
him in August 2017. (GE 3; Tr. 98-99) Based on the evidence presented, allegations of
falsification are unsubstantiated. 
Character references
Applicant is well-regarded by senior management, supervisors, and colleagues.
Who are familiar with his work and demonstrated character (AE K; Tr. 30-33, 42-45, 61-
66,and 80-81) They credit him with being a valued employee, a member of his company’s
leadership cadre, and a senior network operations team leader, who regularly deploys to
various training ranges and trains other team leaders. (AE K; Tr.  30-33, 42-45, and 61-
66) 
Applicant’s supervisors and current facility security officer (FSO) are fully aware of
his clearance situation, and do not believe he has acted dishonestly or with any intent to
5
deceive the Government. (Tr. 41, 45-46, 52-60, and 80-81) They uniformly consider
Applicant to be honest, trustworthy, and dependable.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
6
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any
failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national
security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
7
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent child
support withholding orders in States A and B. Additional security concerns are raised in
connection with Applicant’s omissions of his delinquent child support orders in the e-QIP
he completed in November 2015. 
Financial concerns
Applicant’s delinquent child support payments compiled in States A and B 
warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC
¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” His delinquencies resulted in initiated withholding orders in States A and B
that remain in force.
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, evaluation of an applicant’s delinquent debts are critical to an
assessment of the applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following
rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to
holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited layoffs
and unawareness of garnishment actions taken by State B accounted for much of the
problems associated with his delinquencies in States A and B. Not until an October
2017 OPM interview did he learn of the misapplications of his withheld pay from his
military retirement accounts. 
After learning of the misapplications of child support withholding from his military
retirement account from the OPM investigator who interviewed him, Applicant  took
prompt corrective actions with both states. He has carefully documented his enlistment
of State A court resources to correct the state’s misapplication of garnished funds from
Applicant’s military retirement account and restore proper State A/State B allocations of
Applicant’s withheld monies from Applicant’s garnished military retirement account. 
Based on his cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” applies to Applicant’s
situation.
8
Applicant’s corrective steps also enable him to claim the full mitigation benefits of
the “acting responsibly” prong of  MC ¶ 20(b), as well as the benefits of other applicable
mitigating conditions.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is fully applicable. 
See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-
11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd.
Nov. 29, 2005)). 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
In Applicant’s case, he has addressed his delinquent child support withholding orders 
and resolved them with corrective payment applications covering his child support
withholding in States A and B and is now current with both SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b
accounts.
Personal conduct concerns
Allegations covering Applicant’s omissions of his child support withholding orders 
in the e-QIP he completed in November 2015 are successfully refuted by Applicant’s
credible explanations of his omissions of both withholding orders. Inadvertence and
unawareness are both cited as reasons for his omissions. 
Applicant’s explanations for his omissions are credible ones and are accepted.
Based on the evidence presented, allegations of falsification are unsubstantiated. 
Whole-Person Assessment
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability,
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the financial issues raised in the
SOR, but the contributions he has made to his employer and the defense industry in
general.  Favorable credit is also warranted for the corrective steps Applicant has taken
with his State A and State B creditors. 
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances are promising and
enable him to overcome any reasonable doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability,
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted
that his finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility
requirements for holding a security clearance. Financial concerns are mitigated. 
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b. and 2.a.
Criteria for meeting the eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance are
satisfied.   
9
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                           For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 2.a:                           For Applicant
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
11
  
12
