 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00451 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended (Exec. Or.); DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG) for all adjudicative 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on April 3, 2018. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2018. On June 21, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing, 
scheduling the hearing on August 7, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel offered eight documents into evidence, which I marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-8. These exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered 12 documents, which I marked as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A-L and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript on August 
23, 2018 (Tr.). 
 
 I held the record open after the hearing until September 5, 2018, to allow Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Hearing Exhibit 2On August 28, 2018, he 
provided Department Counsel with three documents consisting of 38 pages, which I have 
marked as AE M-O. These exhibits are admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g and 1.i 
through 1.q with explanations and two documents. His admissions are incorporated into 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and works for a defense contractor. In 2002, he earned 
an associate’s degree, and in 2011 he was awarded a bachelor’s degree. He married in 
2002. He and his wife separated in March 2011 and were divorced in 2014 in a 
contentious proceeding. (Tr. 48.) He and his former wife have two children, ages 17 and 
15. Applicant had a third child in October 2012 with another woman.  
 
From 2002 to 2013, Applicant was employed by the same defense contractor. He 
was granted a security clearance in about 2006. He left the company in 2013 to avoid an 
anticipated layoff and worked in the commercial sector, which resulted in the loss of his 
clearance. He rejoined the contractor in April 2017 and earns in excess of $100,000 per 
year. (Tr. 45.) On May 15, 2017, he submitted a security clearance application (SCA) so 
that he would again be eligible to work on classified projects. He has never served in the 
military. 
 
The SOR alleges 17 debts totaling about $77,000. Eight of these debts are alleged 
to be delinquent student loans totaling about $48,000. Three of the debts are consumer 
debts for about $24,000. Five debts are for unpaid medical bills in the total amount of 
about $450. The last debt is a child-support obligation with a balance of about $5,000. 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his 2011 separation and subsequent divorce, 
which forced him to support two households. Due to his separation and divorce 
proceedings, Applicant could not pay his student loans when they became due after his 
June 2011 graduation.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k: delinquent student loans totaling about 
$34,000. Some of Applicant’s student loans date back to when he was seeking an 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application, dated May 15, 2017 
(GE 1), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
associate’s degree (2000-2002). He started to pay those loans after receiving his degree. 
He began taking additional courses to work towards a bachelor’s degree in 2009. By the 
time he received his degree in June 2011, Applicant and his wife had just separated. (Tr. 
28; AE N at 15). He deferred paying his student loans as long as he could because he 
could not afford to pay for two households and his student loans. (Tr. 28-30.) Applicant 
eventually defaulted on his student loans in 2015. (GE 4 at 4.)  
 
Applicant has been contacted by a collection agency seeking to collect these six 
student loans. A July 2018 letter from the agency states that Applicant presently owes a 
total amount of $78,181 on the six student loans alleged in the SOR in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 
1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. (AE A at 1.) The agency’s letter seeks information from Applicant so that 
the parties can set up a repayment plan under the Federal Loan Rehabilitation Program. 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant was just beginning to address these six student loans 
by seeking to rehabilitate them with nine monthly payments. (Tr. 31.) After the hearing, 
Applicant accelerated the rehabilitation process and received notification, dated 
September 4, 2018, that he had successfully established a repayment plan, which 
provided for monthly payments of $386 commencing on September 15, 2018. (AE P.) 
Applicant has resolved the default status of these loans, but as of the close of the record, 
he has not made a payment.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f: delinquent student loans totaling about $14,680. Applicant 
also defaulted on two additional student loans in 2015. They are being collected by a 
different collection agency. (AE H and I.) He successfully rehabilitated the loans by 
making payments in 2017 and 2018, and the loans are no longer in default status. (SOR 
answer, attachment 2) As of March 26, 2018, the total amount due on these loans was 
$14,256. (AE I.) Applicant’s monthly payment on the rehabilitated loans of $106 began 
on May 13, 2018. (AE I.) He claims he has been making these payments, but he provided 
no substantiating documentation. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c: two credit-card accounts in collection with a total 
balance of $23,156. These debts were accrued during Applicant’s marriage. (Tr. 50.) In 
his response to the SOR, Applicant claimed that he was advised by his divorce attorney 
not to pay his consumer debts because they were marital debts and must be resolved 
through the divorce proceedings. Eventually, the debts were allocated to Applicant. 
Applicant tried to deal with his consumer creditors, but was unsuccessful. (Tr. 52.) He 
asked his accountant for a referral to a debt-resolution advisor and was referred to a debt-
resolution law firm. (Tr. 25-27.) On July 3, 2018, he engaged this firm to verify his debts 
and to negotiate settlements. (AE M.) He pays the firm $130 per month for their services. 
(Tr. 51.) The initial step in the firm’s process is to send letters to Applicant’s creditors 
seeking validation of his debts. Applicant provided an example of such a letter. (AE D.) 
Applicant has begun to address these debts, but he has not yet made any payments to 
his creditors. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: credit-card account in collection with a balance of $626. This 
account became delinquent in November 2013. (GE 7 at 2.) Applicant produced evidence 
of a settlement offer to pay this debt in the amount of $300 if he paid by July 25, 2018, 
 
4 
 
shortly before the hearing. (AE K at 2.) He also produced evidence of the payment. (AE 
K at 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: Delinquent child support account with a balance of $ 4,997 and 
an arrearage of $2,634. This debt arose when Applicant gained custody of his son in 
about August 2016. As a result of this change, his child-support obligation to his former 
wife was supposed to be reduced. (AE J at 1.) Due to a clerical error, the agency collecting 
the child-support payments did not make this adjustment and an arrearage developed. 
Applicant denied this allegation in his response to the SOR because he had disputed the 
debt. He produced an agency record showing that he actually has a credit of $1,793 as 
of July 2018. (AE J.) Applicant has documented that this allegation is incorrect and that 
he has favorably resolved this disputed allegation. Applicant also testified that his third 
child, who has a different mother, is supported by him with voluntary monthly payments 
of $1,100. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.q: medical debts in collection with a total 
balance of $447. Applicant identified four of these debts in his SCA after he reviewed his 
credit report and noted that these debts existed. (GE 1 at 41-42.) In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all five medical debts. In his September 2017 background 
interview, Applicant identified these debts as related to his daughter’s treatment in March 
2014 at a specific medical clinic. (GE 4 at 5.) At the hearing, he testified that he would 
like to pay these small debts, but he has been unable to find the party that owns the debts 
so he could make payments. He provided no testimony or evidence that he had tried to 
contact the medical clinic to determine if he could resolve these debts with a payment.  
 
 Applicant submitted five character references from individuals who have worked 
with Applicant, in some cases, for many years. They all praise his intelligence, creativity 
and trustworthiness and hold him in the highest regard. (AE B.) 
 
 Applicant candidly admitted at the hearing that he currently owes about $7,000 in 
past-due federal income taxes for tax years 2015, 2016, and 2017. He under withheld on 
his income during those years because he needed the extra funds to pay his family 
support and personal living expenses. He has a payment arrangement with the IRS to 
resolve this tax debt. He pays the IRS $136 per month. He has been paying this debt 
down for about two years. (Tr. 56-57; AE O.) This debt is not alleged in the SOR.2  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
                                                          
2 Since this debt is not alleged in the SOR, I do not consider this debt as establishing a disqualifying 
condition. I can consider them, however, in weighing mitigation and under the whole-person concept, as 
well as in weighing Applicant’s credibility. ISCR Case No. 14-01491 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar.30, 2015); ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  
 
5 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
 
6 
 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, testimony and the documentary evidence in the record 
establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indication that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are not infrequent and they largely 
are outstanding, even though they arose a long time ago. They occurred under 
circumstances involving a period of financial distress when he separated from his wife 
and proceeded to file for divorce. Other causes of financial distress are always possible, 
and Applicant’s failure to handle his recent problems could recur. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s behavior, particularly his untimely response to his circumstances, casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s debts arose out of his separation 
and divorce and the attendant costs of supporting two households. This was a condition 
beyond his control. Exacerbating this situation were his student loans, which came due 
for repayment after his graduation in 2011. The student-loan situation was not within 
Applicant’s control, but it was predictable following the completion of his college 
education. Applicant did not start acting responsibly to address his delinquent debts until 
after he received the SOR in March 2018.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant offered no evidence that he has received 
any formal financial counseling. About one month before the hearing, he engaged the 
services of a for-profit, debt-resolution firm to help him resolve his non-student loan 
indebtedness, primarily the two credit-card accounts that are in collection. That is not 
sufficient to establish counseling under AG ¶ 20(c). At this early stage, I cannot conclude 
that these debts are being resolved or are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially established. Applicant has belatedly initiated a plan to 
resolve his debts. He has an insufficient track record, however, of having both the financial 
ability and the will to make all of the necessary payments that his substantial indebtedness 
will require. His limited efforts to try to resolve even the five small medical debts also 
undermine full application of this mitigating condition. 
 
Applicant has paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, though the payment was made 
shortly before the hearing. He has also successfully disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h. The remaining debts are unresolved. Also, Applicant’s outstanding federal tax debt 
undercuts his evidence in mitigation. Perhaps in the future, Applicant’s payments on his 
student loans, credit-card debts, and unpaid medical bills will establish a sufficient good-
faith effort to mitigate his past actions of letting his debts remain delinquent for years, but 
at this point in time, it is too soon to conclude that his efforts are sufficient to establish a 
good-faith effort required of this mitigating condition. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established with respect to the one debt that Applicant disputes, his 
child-support arrearage. (SOR ¶ 1.h.) Applicant has consistently denied that he owed this 
back child support, and he produced sufficient evidence to establish that he did not owe 
this debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3 After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i-1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
