 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00362 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Dave F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate financial responsibility, or that 
his financial problems are being resolved. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 6, 
2016. He was interviewed by a government investigator on July 6, 2017. After reviewing 
the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 9, 2018, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on April 1, 2018, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), containing the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
April 30, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on May 13, 2018. He was granted a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to submit any objections to the FORM and 
 
2 
 
 
to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. Absent any 
objections, I admitted and considered the Government’s proposed evidence.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included an 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator on 
July 6, 2017. (FORM, Item 3) Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of 
his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I admitted the FORM’s proffered 
evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted the seven SOR financial allegations (¶¶ 
1.a through 1.g). He also submitted comments in mitigation and explanation. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He graduated from high school in 1993. He married in 
1998, and has four children ages, 21, 19, 15, and 8. A federal contractor hired Applicant 
as a truck driver in December 2015, and is sponsoring his clearance. This is Applicant’s 
first SCA.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2016 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed he had financial problems caused by sporadic employment and mechanical 
breakdowns of his truck. He stated that he defaulted on a motorcycle loan, and had filed 
for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy to prevent the foreclosure of his home in October 2012. The 
bankruptcy was dismissed in January 2017, because of lack of payments.  
 
Applicant explained to the government investigator during his July 2017 interview 
(FORM, Item 3) that his financial problems resulted from a number of factors including, 
his medical problems (no documentary evidence presented), his truck having two 
expensive mechanical breakdowns, and the lack of work, all of which prevented him 
from working. Additionally, Applicant noted that as a truck driver, he was always on the 
road and delegated to his wife the responsibility of managing their finances and paying 
the bills. According to Applicant, his wife failed to manage their finances properly and 
she had failed to pay the mortgage and other accounts as required. 
 
Applicant stated that he had not made any mortgage payments since December 
2016, and his salary was garnished twice by creditors. When asked about his current 
financial situation, Applicant indicated that it was not good, that he was not capable of 
 
3 
 
 
meeting his financial obligations because of his unstable employment situation. His 
unsteady income was insufficient to pay for his living expenses and accumulated debts. 
He used his credit to pay for his living expenses. He was unable to pay his credit cards 
and some of his consumer debts, which became delinquent.  
 
Applicant has filed for bankruptcy four times: in March 2003 (discharged in 
September 2007); in January 2009 (dismissed in September 2012); in October 2012 
(dismissed in January 2017); and in July 2017 (outcome unknown). The 2009 and 2012 
bankruptcies were dismissed because of lack of payments. Applicant admitted the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. He presented no documentary evidence of any 
contacts with creditors, payments made, or payment agreements established 
concerning these SOR debts. Applicant stated has not been able to address these 
debts because of his lack of employment. He promised to address these SOR debts as 
soon as he gets steady employment.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence concerning his current financial situation 
(monthly income, living expenses, and debt payments). He stated during his 2017 
interview that he had not participated in financial counseling and does not have a 
working budget. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AGs list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
4 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. He has been 
unemployed or underemployed apparently for a significant period. He has been unable 
to address his financial obligations and filed for bankruptcy protection in 2003, 2009, 
2012, and 2017. The 2009 and 2012 bankruptcies were dismissed because of lack of 
payments. AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The record established these disqualifying conditions, 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained an applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 The AG ¶ 20(b) financial considerations mitigating condition is not fully raised by 
the facts in this case and does not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems started before 2003, and are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant’s financial 
problems could be attributed to his medical problems, unemployment, and 
underemployment. Notwithstanding, he failed to submit documentary evidence of his 
medical problems. More importantly, he did not present sufficient evidence of good-faith 
efforts to pay his debts or that he has been financially responsible under his 
circumstances.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to 
demonstrate financial responsibility, or that his financial problems are being resolved. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant, 44, has been employed with federal contractors since 2015. This is his 
first SCA. His evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against granting a security 
clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations security concerns lead me to conclude 
that granting a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his delinquent debts, a 
healthy financial picture, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, 
he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
