1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00955 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On April 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 9, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on August 27, 2018, and had 
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 6, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2018.  
11/30/2018
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He graduated from high school in 1982, and obtained 
his associate’s degree in December 1986. Applicant has been employed as a senior 
programmer by a federal contractor since November 2012. He reported a period of 
unemployment from June 2012 to November 2012. Applicant  reported no military 
service and a previous security clearance from DOD in September 2002. Applicant 
married in September 1998 and he has a 19 year-old daughter.    
 
Applicant reported the delinquent debt, which was placed for collection by a bank 
in the amount of $31,702, in section 26 of his security clearance application (SCA).2  
There, he stated his intention to contact an attorney to resolve this delinquency by 
making payment arrangements with the creditor. In his Answer to the SOR on July 12, 
2018, Applicant admitted this single alleged delinquent debt. Applicant claims that he 
was laid off by his employer in June 2012, and he fell behind on his mortgage 
payments. He produced no documentary evidence to show that he followed through and 
contacted an attorney or of any repayment arrangement. He stated that he had a 
household reduction in income of 30% and he depleted his 401k account to make 
mortgage payments during his period of unemployment. 3   
 
The single debt in the amount of $31,702 alleged in the SOR was for a credit 
card account that was opened in April 1998 and Applicant’s March 2017 credit bureau 
report reflects the last activity on that account was in November 2012. (Item 5) In his 
January 2018 PSI, Applicant stated that his financial problems were due to his 
unemployment for six months in 2012, and he is now capable of meeting financial 
expenses  and paying the delinquent debt if needed. (Item 4) He stated his “plans to 
contact this creditor and make payment arrangements within 3 months if there is still an 
outstanding balance.”4 He was given the opportunity to provide additional 
documentation regarding the financial delinquency. He only provided documentation 
showing that his mortgage account is current with no past due payments. (attachment to 
Item 4) The delinquent credit-card debt is the only allegation in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant provided no response to the FORM or evidence that he received 
financial counseling. He provided no budget showing income against expenses, or other 
documentation to show progress on his delinquent debt. He professed his intentions to 
repay this delinquency in his SCA in November 2016, and in his PSI in January 2018. 
He produced no documentary evidence that he has done so.    
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 18, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3), or his personal security interview (PSI) on January 17, 
2018. (Item 4)  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 3, at 29. 
 
4 Item 4, p. 4. 
 
3 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Administrative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt alleged in the SOR is confirmed by his credit reports 
and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.5 
                                                          
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has not met that burden.  The sole delinquent debt alleged in the SOR has not 
been adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured a six month period of unemployment six years ago, and a 
downturn in the economy. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. Yet, 
despite his knowledge two years ago that this delinquency might affect his eligibility for 
a security clearance when he completed his SCA, and then reinforcing his intention to 
make payment arrangements in his PSI, he has done nothing to resolve this account. 
He has produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with his Answer to the 
SOR, or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to 
show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit report and SOR 
list the delinquent debt to a bank totaling $31,702. Applicant did not provide enough 
details with documentary corroboration about what he did to address his SOR debt. He 
did not provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, 
such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the 
creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence 
 
6 
 
 
to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;6 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, 
basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debt in the 
SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debt. He did not describe financial counseling or provide 
his budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM advised Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or his] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has gone through unemployment 
and an unexpected loss of household income. He has been employed most of his adult 
life, with the exception of the six month period of unemployment in 2012. Most 
importantly, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegation in the SOR. Instead, he 
has made hollow promises of his intent to repay his delinquent debt. He has not met his 
burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:               Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
