 
 
1 
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No.07-11254  
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Baker, Esq., and Alan Gourley, Esq. 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the guidelines for personal 
conduct and foreign influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his notarized Answer of 
September 8, 2012, Applicant denied the allegations. He also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 19, 2012, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on December 11, 2012. Department Counsel offered six exhibits, 
which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant testified and 
offered the testimony of one additional witness. He also submitted 11 exhibits, which I 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
  
 
 
2 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through K. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 21, 2012.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 I granted the Government’s request that I take administrative notice of facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (PRC; China), contained in 12 government 
documents. (Hearing Exhibit [HE] I) 
 
 To conform to the evidence presented, I amended the SOR at the hearing to 
insert paragraph 2, Guideline B: Foreign Influence, and added the following allegation: 
 
  2.a. That information set forth in paragraph 1, above. 
 
Applicant did not object. I held the record open to allow both parties to submit briefs 
regarding Guideline B. On January 15, 2013, I received Applicant's brief (HE II), with 
three additional exhibits attached. Department Counsel raised no objection. I admitted 
them as AE L through N.2 Department Counsel submitted a brief dated January 31, 
2013. (HE III) The record closed on February 4, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After reviewing the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 66 years old and single. He married in 1967, divorced in 1984, and 
has three adult children. Applicant and his family are native-born U.S. citizens. He 
completed a bachelor’s degree in 1969 and a doctorate in computer science in 1987. 
Between 1969 and 1987, he held a secret security clearance while employed as a DoD 
contractor. After receiving his doctorate in 1987, Applicant worked as an assistant 
college professor for 10 years. In about 1998, he started working on defense contracts 
involving military health care management. He currently works as a systems engineer 
and architect specializing in healthcare information technology management. The two 
co-founders of his current company submitted references stating they have known him 
for approximately ten years. They describe him as an expert in his field, who is 
trustworthy, open, and careful about protecting proprietary and sensitive information. A 
DoD employee whose contract Applicant supports, stated that she has known Applicant 
for about 12 years. She respects his professional opinions and considers him an 
important member of her team. (GE 1; AE G, H, I, K; Tr. 31-44, 142-143) 
 
In about 1999, Applicant met Dr. A., a Chinese citizen. A few months after they 
met, they became roommates and sexual partners. On his January 2006 security 
clearance application, Applicant listed his own street address, apartment number, and 
city for Dr. A. He testified that providing the same address as his own indicated Dr. A. 
                                                 
2 AE L through N are cited in Applicant's brief (HE II) as Attachment A through C, respectively.  
 
 
3 
was his roommate. However, he listed a different state for Dr. A.’s address. He testified 
that he mistakenly listed the incorrect state. He also testified he “felt an obligation to 
indicate that I did live with him so that there would be no doubt.” During his May 2007 
security interview, Applicant stated that Dr. A. resided with him. (GE 1, 2, 4, 6; AE K; Tr. 
69-77) 
 
Under Section 14/15 of the security clearance application, “Your Relatives and 
Associates,” the choices include “Guardian,” “Associate” and “Adult Currently Living 
With You.” Applicant did not list Dr. A. as an “Adult Currently Living With You.” He 
believed that because neither “roommate” nor “housemate” was among the options, the 
word “associate” best described his relationship with Dr. A. The instructions for that 
category state, “Include only foreign national associates with whom you or your spouse 
are bound by affection, obligation, or close and continuing contact.” He chose this 
description because he and Dr. A. had close and continuing contact, although Applicant 
did not feel that they were “bound by affection or obligation.” He also stated on his 
security clearance application that Dr. A. was a Chinese citizen, and that he, “has been 
a resident alien since 03/08/99 . . . I am his business partner in the [company name] 
listed in foreign companies.” (GE 1, 6; AE K; Tr. 69-77) 
 
Applicant did not describe Dr. A. in the 2006 security clearance application as a 
cohabitant. At the hearing, he said the word “cohabitant” was not accurate, because 
they were not in a spouse-like relationship. In his October 2007 response to DOHA 
foreign influence interrogatories, Applicant described Dr. A. as a “cohabitant, business 
associate.” However, in his 2008 interview,3 he stated that when he used the word 
“cohabitant” in 2007, he “misspoke, and didn’t mean we were life partners or in a 
spouse-like relationship. We were just housemates/roommates then, and we are just 
housemates/roommates now.” Later in that interview, Applicant clarified this statement 
by stating that he and Dr. A. had a sexual relationship which started in 1999 and ended 
in 2006. He added that he could not be blackmailed based on this relationship. Dr. A. 
became a U.S. citizen in September 2008.4 They remain roommates, and Applicant 
described their current relationship as “best of friends.” Applicant pays for the household 
expenses, and Dr. A. takes care of household duties. (GE 1, 2, 4, 6; AE K; Tr. 69-77, 
91) 
 
Dr. A., 57 years old, was an orthopedic surgeon in china before immigrating to 
the United States. In 1986, he came to the United States to pursue a graduate degree in 
                                                 
3 Applicant was interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in May 2007. In 
May 2012, Applicant reviewed the summary of the interview, made minor changes, and adopted the 
reviewed version as accurate (GE 4) He completed DOHA Foreign Influence Interrogatories in October 
2007. (GE 6) In November 2008, Applicant was also interviewed by an OPM agent over a two-day 
period. He reviewed the resulting affidavit, made minor changes, and signed a statement that it was true 
to the best of his knowledge and belief. (GE 2) 
 
4 China does not recognize dual citizenship. A Chinese citizen who is naturalized as a foreign citizen 
loses his or her Chinese citizenship. (HE I) 
 
 
 
4 
public health. He is not licensed to practice medicine in the United States. After the 
1989 protests in Tiananmen Square in China, Dr. A. agreed to testify before the U.S. 
Congress about conditions in China. Several years later, in 1999, Dr. A. met Applicant. 
In 2000, when Dr. A. worked at a university hospital, his employer was hosting a 
conference in China, and asked Dr. A. to accompany the participants. Dr. A. feared he 
might be on a “watch list,” and be arrested if he returned to China because of his 
Congressional testimony. Therefore, he asked Applicant to join him on the trip. 
Applicant testified, “He had a fear that he -- he did not want to return to China by 
himself. He wanted to in essence have a witness.” Dr. A. was not approached or 
detained during the trip. (GE 1, 2, 4; AE K, M; Tr. 78-80, 150-153) 
 
For about six months between 2002 and 2003, Dr. A. and Applicant worked on 
setting up an exchange program through which American nursing students at a U.S. 
university would receive college credits and experience by working as nurses in China. 
Chinese hospitals would also benefit, because they had a severe shortage of nurses. 
During their 2002 trip to China, Applicant and Dr. A. visited a nursing school for three 
days and gave a presentation to school officials about the project. They also presented 
it to a local medical school. Both schools were interested but expressed the need for 
funding. Applicant and Dr. A. planned to submit a funding proposal to a U.S. federal 
agency. However, the war in Iraq prevented the agency from providing funds, and the 
project ended. (GE 2, 6) 
 
When he was a teen, Dr. A. learned farming because his father, a university 
professor, was sent to a farm during the Chinese Cultural Revolution. On one of his trips 
to China in the early 2000s, Dr. A. learned that the Chinese government was offering 
land at a low price to those who would start businesses in an agricultural development 
zone. The Chinese government offered additional benefits if the Chinese business was 
structured as a joint venture with a foreign company. The benefits included tax-free 
operation for several years, a company car at 40 percent off retail price, and free 
housing. (GE 2; Tr. 81-83, 87, 101, 108, 135, 153-156) 
 
Dr. A. decided to start a company focusing on herbs, fruits, and vegetables used 
in traditional Chinese medicine. Applicant described the business as a “bio-technology 
micro-propagation and agriculture company.” Dr. A. and Applicant took several 
company-related trips to China. Dr. A. conducted business, and Applicant considered it 
a vacation. They usually stayed two to three weeks. Dr. A.’s Chinese company, MS,5 
had 40 acres of land, and five or six workers to grow the product. The local 
government’s agriculture department provided a three-story building, comparable to a 
townhouse, for company use rent-free for several years. The Chinese employees of 
Company MS lived there. Applicant and Dr. A. also stayed there on visits to China 
between January 2004 and June 2006. In 2004 or 2005, Applicant attended two or three 
meetings with city officials when Dr. A. was establishing his farming business. Applicant 
                                                 
5 Dr. A.’s U.S. and Chinese corporations used slightly different names. The U.S. corporation will be 
referred to in this decision as Corporation M, and the Chinese company as Company MS. (Tr. 115) 
 
 
 
5 
was not involved in the discussions because they were conducted in Chinese. In 2003 
or 2004, Applicant also accompanied Dr. A. to a three-day business fair in China for 
new companies. Applicant did not interact with the local citizens or city officials who 
attended because of the language barrier. (GE 2; AE M; Tr. 81-83, 87, 101, 108, 135, 
153-156)  
 
 Dr. A. asked Applicant to set up a U.S. company to partner with his Chinese 
company so that he could obtain the joint-venture benefits offered by the Chinese 
government.6 In January 2004, Applicant agreed to help Dr. A. In his 2008 interview, 
Applicant stated, “If my financial help provided some cost-cutting for his business in the 
PRC, then I was more than happy to assist.” He prepared an application to incorporate 
Corporation M, a U.S. limited liability corporation, in his home state, using his and Dr. 
A.’s address as the address of the corporation. Applicant, Dr. A., and four of Dr. A.’s 
friends comprised the board of directors. Applicant listed himself as the chief financial 
officer (CFO). Along with Applicant and Dr. A., three or four of the directors were 
Chinese citizens.7 Applicant testified they did not establish corporation rules, file 
documents, or pay required fees, because it was created solely to enable them to 
establish Corporation M bank accounts. The state corporation commission terminated 
the corporation on June 3, 2005, when it failed to pay the annual registration fee. 
Applicant noted in his 2008 affidavit that “it would be fair to say” that he had an informal 
relationship with China based on his association with Dr. A. and Company MS. (GE 2, 
6; AE B, L, M; Tr. 83-84, 87, 100, 102-103, 108, 146-147) 
 
Applicant accompanied Dr. A. on six visits to China between November 2000 and 
June 2006.8 He also took weekly Chinese language classes between 2004 and 2006 
because of his frequent travel there related to the Chinese Company MS. He 
discontinued the classes in 2006, because Company MS went out of business, and 
“therefore, there wouldn’t be any foreseeable trips to the PRC.” Applicant visited the 
Chinese embassy in the United States 12 times between 2000 and 2005 for travel 
visas. In China, he sometimes stayed in hotels, and sometimes in the Company MS 
townhouse. Applicant and Dr. A. also visited Russia for three weeks in December 2001. 
They visited a medical school in one major Russian city and asked about its nursing 
program. They also spent three or four days visiting Dr. A.’s nephew, at the medical 
school he attends in another major Russian city. They spoke with “random students” 
about the nursing program there, talked with numerous professors about Russia’s 
                                                 
6 Applicant was not required to report foreign travel to his company, but informed his supervisors when 
he planned to be outside of the United States. (GE 2) He informed his employer of his connection with 
the Chinese Company MS. (GE 3) 
 
7 Applicant was uncertain if one of the directors, Dr. W., is currently a German citizen, or if he was a 
German citizen or a Chinese citizen when the company was incorporated. (Tr. 96) 
 
8 Applicant listed five visits to China between 2000 and 2006 in his January 2006 security clearance 
application, four visits during his May 2007 security interview, and six visits in his October 2007 
response to DOHA interrogatories. (GE 1, 4, 6) 
 
 
 
6 
medical education system, and attended several classes given in English. On his 
security clearance application, Applicant listed the purpose of his trips to China and 
Russia as “pleasure.” Dr. A. paid for Applicant's hotel, meals, and transportation on 
several of the trips to China, because Applicant paid for Dr. A.’s expenses when they 
were in the United States. (GE 1, 2, 4; AE K) 
 
During their trips to China in 2000, 2002, and 2006, Applicant and Dr. A. met with 
Dr. A.’s sisters and their families. One of Dr. A.’s sisters, a Chinese citizen and resident, 
is a retired 57-year-old doctor. Her husband is a retired engineer, and their adult son is 
unemployed. Dr. A. last spoke to his sister about three years ago. They usually 
exchange Christmas emails, but did not do so in 2012. His other sister is a 65-year-old 
citizen and resident of China. She is a retired high school teacher. Her husband is 65, 
retired, and has Alzheimer’s disease. Dr. A. speaks with her monthly by telephone. 
Their son is a medical doctor at a Chinese hospital. Dr. A. and his nephew speak by 
telephone once per month, and exchange occasional emails. Dr. A. last visited his 
sisters in 2009. As of 2008, Applicant had no plans to visit China in the future, but stated 
he would likely go if Dr. A. wished to go for a vacation. In 2013, Applicant and Dr. A. 
stated they have no plans to travel to China. (GE 1, 2, 4; AE K, L, M; Tr. 80, 92) 
 
On his trips to China, Applicant met numerous farmers and peasants who were 
old friends of Dr. A. Applicant and Dr. A. also met with his former medical school 
classmates. Applicant noted that some of them had become mid-level Chinese 
government workers.9 The following friends, and one family member, became involved 
in the U.S. and Chinese companies. (GE 1, 2, 4; AE K, L, M; Tr. 80, 92) 
 
• Dr. W. – resides in Germany. He is or was a Chinese citizen; Applicant is unsure 
if he is now a German citizen. Dr. A. believes he is a German citizen. Dr. A. was a 
medical school classmate of Dr. W. and has known him since 1980. Dr. W. was on the 
board of directors of Corporation M. He agreed to invest approximately $15,000 in Dr. 
A.’s business. Applicant met Dr. W. once in about 2004 when they were visiting the 
Company MS business quarters in China. Applicant and Dr. A. had dinner with Dr. W. 
and his mother. When Dr. A. was in the United States, he talked about monthly with Dr. 
W. by telephone. Until about 2009 or 2010, Applicant had brief contacts with Dr. W. if he 
answered the phone when Dr. W. called Dr. A. at home. Dr. W. spoke little English. As 
of 2008, Applicant stated Dr. A. and Dr. W. were close friends and remained in touch. In 
2013, Dr. A. stated he has not seen Dr. W. since 2004 or 2005, talks to him by 
telephone every few months, and exchanges emails every three months. Applicant did 
not list Dr. W. on security documents or in his security interviews because he did not 
believe he had “close and continuing contact” with Dr. W. (GE 2; AE B, M; Tr. 87-92, 96) 
 
• Dr. Z. – is a university professor and a resident of China. Applicant believes Dr. 
Z. is a Chinese citizen, but is not certain. Dr. Z. agreed to invest in the Chinese 
                                                 
9 A May 2012 DOHA interrogatory asked Applicant for an updated list of foreign contacts. He replied that 
his DoD employment involved professional—but not personal—contact with foreign citizens from 
“countries such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan.” (GE 3) 
 
 
7 
company. He was a member of the board of directors of the U.S. corporation. In his 
2008 interview, Applicant said he met Dr. Z. in 2000 or 2002 in China, when he and Dr. 
A. stopped by Dr. Z.’s home, and that they had in-person contact two or three times in 
China. At his hearing, Applicant said he met Dr. Z. one time in about 2003 or 2004 at a 
tea house in China, when Dr. A. was setting up Company MS. Dr. Z. does not speak 
English and Applicant does not speak Chinese, so they did not converse. Dr. A. referred 
to Dr. Z. in conversations with Applicant as his “pharmaceutical company friend” 
because he operated a Tibetan pharmaceutical company. Dr. A. has not been in touch 
with Dr. Z. since 2006. At the hearing, Applicant stated he did not list Dr. Z. on his 
security application or disclose him during his 2007 security interview because he had 
no recollection of their brief meeting. (GE 2; AE B, M; Tr. 92-96, 154) 
 
• Dr. R – was a medical school classmate of Dr. A. in China. He resides in the 
United States and works for a U.S. government agency. Applicant met him in 
approximately 2002. Applicant and Dr. A. believe Dr. R. is currently a U.S. citizen, but 
they are not certain. He was on the board of directors of the U.S. Corporation M. He 
agreed to invest approximately $7,500 in Dr. A.’s business. As of 2008, Applicant and 
Dr. A. had been visiting Dr. R. and his family once or twice per year for holiday dinners. 
Applicant has also assisted Dr. R. by editing some of Dr. R.’s professional papers. In his 
2008 interview, Applicant said he was in contact with Dr. R. via email about every three 
months. Their last contact was in approximately 2008. As of 2013, Dr. A. stated he is in 
touch with Dr. R. once or twice per year at holidays, and had last spoken with him in 
January 2013. They do not exchange emails. Applicant did not list Dr. R. on his 2006 
security clearance application because he did not consider this contact to be “close and 
continuing contact,” and also because he thought Dr. R. was a U.S. citizen. (GE 2; AE 
B, L, M; Tr. 97-99) 
 
• Mr. L. – is Dr. A.’s cousin. Applicant met him in China in 2002. When the 
Chinese company was being set up, Mr. L. resided in China. He is a member of the 
board of directors of the U.S. Corporation M. From 2004 to 2006, Mr. L. worked for Dr. 
A. as the onsite manager of Company MS in China. Applicant saw him during each trip 
to China in 2002, 2004, 2005, and 2006. Mr. L. lived in the townhouse that the Chinese 
government provided as one of the incentives for the joint venture. After January 2004, 
whenever Applicant and Dr. A. traveled to China, they stayed in the government 
townhouse as well. Each time he visited China, Applicant saw Mr. L. on a daily basis 
during “. . . meals and social activities of visiting [Dr. A.’s] friends and family.” Applicant 
said he and Mr. L. did not have much interaction, because Mr. L.’s English-speaking 
skills are limited. Applicant last saw Mr. L. during his June 2006 trip to China, a few 
months after he completed his security clearance application. Applicant did not list Mr. 
L. in his security clearance application, 2007 security interview, or interrogatory 
because, although he saw him every day while he was in China, it was “in passing.” He 
did not consider his interactions with Mr. L. to be “close and continuing” contact. Dr. A. 
last spoke to Mr. L. in about October 2012. They exchange emails about every three 
months. (GE 2; AE B, M; Tr. 99-102)  
 
 
 
8 
• Dr. DW – was a citizen and resident of China at the time Dr. A. was setting up 
the Chinese company. He and Dr. A. completed their medical residency together. In his 
2008 affidavit, Applicant noted that Dr. DW invested in the Chinese company. Dr. DW is 
a hospital administrator in China. Applicant stated that he speaks “halting English.” 
Applicant met him “a few times” during his visits to China. Applicant and Dr. A. last saw 
Dr. DW in 2006. Dr. A. does not maintain contact with him. (GE 2; AE L, M; Tr. 103-104) 
 
• Mr. Y – was a resident of China at the time Dr. A. was setting up his business in 
China. He was a classmate of Dr. A. in medical school in China. He invested in the 
company, helped him to set up the land purchase in China, and to qualify for the 
benefits from the Chinese government. He holds a government position as a city 
administrator in China. Applicant first met him in 2000, and about three other times 
during visits to China. Applicant and Dr. A. had dinner at Mr. Y.’s home with his family. 
Mr. Y speaks basic English. Applicant and Dr. A. last had contact with him in 2006. (GE 
2; AE L, M; Tr. 104-106) 
 
 Other than Dr. A. and another Chinese citizen with whom he had a relationship,10 
Applicant did not list any of the above foreign contacts in his security clearance 
                                                 
10 Applicant had a relationship with a Chinese citizen, Mr. QL, who is not alleged in the SOR. In his 2007 
interrogatory response, Applicant described him as a “professional associate,” but in his 2008 affidavit, he 
said he considered Mr. QL a friend.. Applicant met Mr. QL, a Chinese nurse, in 2002 at a U.S. university. 
In 2003, Mr. QL stayed in Applicant's home for two to four weeks. Mr. QL then became a live-in nurse for 
Applicant's ill mother in another state. Applicant paid for his moving expenses, provided rent-free board in 
his mother’s home, and paid him $1,500 per month. While Mr. QL cared for Applicant's mother for six to 
eight months, he and Applicant had daily email and telephone contact. They had in-person contact and 
dinners about every two weeks when Applicant visited his mother. Mr. QL also resided at Applicant's 
home rent-free for several weeks in 2004, after Applicant's mother passed away. He had a key to 
Applicant's home, and he used Applicant's telephone to call family in China. Applicant listed Mr. QL as a 
foreign citizen in his 2007 interrogatory response, and described their friendship. (GE 2, 6) 
 
Mr. QL returned to China in 2004. As of 2008, he was teaching nursing at a Chinese college. 
When Applicant traveled to China with Dr. A. in June 2006, he left Dr. A. and traveled to another city to 
stay with Mr. QL’s family for 7 days. As of 2008, Applicant exchanged emails with Mr. QL once or twice 
per month. Applicant has also sent Mr. QL “publicly available medical and educational materials.” They 
discuss standardization of medical information in the United States. Applicant has encouraged Mr. QL to 
tell his Chinese colleagues about standardization of medical information in the United States. Applicant 
does not know if Mr. QL’s position in China was affiliated with the Chinese government. Applicant did not 
discuss his DoD employment with Mr. QL, other than describing his job function. Mr. QL is unaware that 
Applicant is applying for a security clearance. Applicant also had brief email contact with Mr. QL’s 
teenage son until 2007. That year, Mr. QL’s son wished to visit the United States. Applicant voluntarily 
sent a letter offering his home for Mr. QL’s son during the visit so that Mr. QL could include it in the visa 
request package. He wrote it as a friend, to help Mr. QL’s son enter the United States. The son’s visa 
request was denied without explanation. As of 2013, Applicant has twice yearly email contact with Mr. QL. 
(GE 2, 6; AE L) 
 
 Although Applicant's relationship with Mr. QL is not alleged in the SOR, the Appeal Board has 
held that,  
 
 
9 
application, May 2007 security interview, or October 2007 interrogatory response.11 
During his 2007 security interview, Applicant stated that, other than Dr. A., none of the 
foreign nationals were aware that he was applying for a security clearance. He noted in 
his 2007 interrogatory response that Dr. A. “calls his family and business associates in 
China and e-mails them from my home.” He also stated that the only information he has 
given Dr. A. about his work is that he develops ways for medical professionals to share 
individuals’ medical information more efficiently. (GE 4, 6)  
  
Dr. A. established an account at the Bank of China for the Chinese company. 
Applicant did not have access to the Chinese account. Dr. A. asked Applicant and the 
Chinese board members to invest $15,000 each in the Chinese company. All but one 
(Mr. L.) agreed to invest in Company MS, but only Applicant and two others (Dr. W. and 
Dr. R) actually provided funds. In his 2007 interrogatory response, Applicant noted that 
“[Dr. A.] told me that I was listed as a co-owner with five other individuals.” Applicant 
testified that he “did not want to be an owner or participant in a foreign company” 
because of his DoD employment, and because he might need a security clearance in 
the future. He also stated, “[O]n the flip side, I felt that I was willing to help my friend, 
and I felt it was important to flag on the SF-86 that I did have this relationship, which 
obviously could be perceived as ownership or whatever. . . .“ He insisted on having two 
separate bank accounts for Corporation M, so that there would be “a simple way for the 
bank account to document anything that I did if there was any question of my 
relationship with the Chinese company.” Applicant stated in his 2007 interrogatory 
response that he loaned Dr. A. approximately $15,000. In his 2008 affidavit, he 
corrected this amount to indicate he had given Dr. A. “two approximately $15,000 loans” 
in 2004. He viewed these loans as “a friend helping another friend out” and was not 
concerned with being repaid. (GE 2, 6; AE M; Tr. 110-111, 130, 143-144) 
 
                                                                                                                                                            
Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's 
credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is 
applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 
6.3. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (Oct. 26, 2006) 
 
11 Applicant's 2007 foreign influence interrogatories asked about his business associations. It did not 
require listing only those with whom he had close and continuing contact. Question 7 of the interrogatory 
asked if Applicant had any business or professional associate who was employed by, inter alia, a foreign 
government; he did not list Dr. Y. Question 9 asked if he had any business or professional associate who 
is a citizen or resident of a foreign country; he listed Dr. A. and Mr. QL, but not the other foreign 
associates listed above. Question 11 asked if he had a business or professional associate who lived in a 
foreign country; he listed Mr. QL, but not the others listed above. Question 13 asked if he had foreign 
contacts that were not the result of official U.S. government business. Applicant answered “No,” but then 
added two qualifications: his contacts with Mr. QL, and the following: “During my foreign trips, I had 
normal social ‘contact’ with various citizens of those countries. None of those contacts resulted in my 
having any subsequent contact.” (GE 6) 
 
 
 
10 
 To qualify for the joint-venture benefits, Dr. A. was required to show the Chinese 
government that his U.S. partner had approximately $100,000 in a U.S. bank. (Tr. 83) 
Applicant and Dr. A. incorporated Corporation M so that they could open a saving and a 
checking account in its name. Both Applicant and Dr. A. could access each account, 
though they agreed that Applicant would use the savings account exclusively, and Dr. 
A. would use the checking account exclusively. In February and March 2004, Applicant 
made deposits of approximately $90,000 and $50,000 in the Corporation M savings 
account. (Tr. 129) He obtained the funds by withdrawing from his retirement account. 
Applicant testified that he took these actions to help his friend, and he did not consider 
himself an investor in the Chinese company. (Tr. 108-114) In describing the $140,000 
he transferred to the Corporation M account, Applicant testified: 
 
In my mind that was never an investment. That was my money. I 
transferred it to the – to the [company M] bank account so that [Dr. A.] 
could get the letter – letter from the bank. It was my retirement money. It 
was collecting the same interest that it was collecting in my [retirement] 
account. I had exclusive control over it, and . . . it never left the [U.S.] 
bank. It never was a part of anything in China.” (Tr. 129)  
 
 Applicant provided bank statements for his and Dr. A.’s U.S. Corporation M bank 
accounts, covering the period January 2004 to August 2005. Applicant’s Corporation M 
savings account shows the following transactions:  
 
1. Initial deposit    $90,046  February 5, 2004 
2. Deposit      50,181  March 12, 2004 
3. Wire transfer to Bank of China  16,045  July 26, 2004 
   Company MS account 
4. Wire transfer to Bank of China  14,270  August 10, 2004 
   Company MS account 
 
In 2004, Dr. A. made the following transactions from his U.S. Company M checking 
account:  
 
5. Initial deposit    $10,000  January 30, 2004 
6. Checks to retail vendors            938   April 2004 
7. Deposit       6,000  June 4, 2004 
8. Wire transfer to Bank of China    6,000  June 4, 2004 
   Company MS account 
9. Deposit wired from German  14,251  August 26, 2004 
  bank account 
10. Withdrawal; funds transferred  23,677  December 30, 2004 
  to Applicant's personal 
  checking account (#9030) 
 
(AE C; Tr. 114, 129-136) 
 
 
11 
The two wire transfers to a Chinese bank in July and August 2004 (line items 3, 4) 
represent Applicant's own investment of about $15,000, and a loan to cover the 
promised investment of approximately $15,000 by Dr. W. In his 2008 affidavit, Applicant 
discussed these funds:  
 
I didn’t think of my $30,000 loan as an investment because it was always 
understood that I didn’t expect or hope for making a profit. My only interest 
was helping [Dr. A.] and hopefully getting my money back, but if I didn’t, 
then it wouldn’t be a big deal. (GE 6) 
 
In August 2004, Dr. W. wired his investment from a German account to Dr. A.’s 
checking account (line item 9). Dr. A. partially repaid the approximately $30,000 loan 
from Applicant by transferring $23,677 to Applicant's personal checking account in 
December 2004 (line item 10). Applicant testified that on his security clearance 
application and in his 2007 interview, he listed only a $15,000 loan, because he did not 
remember that he had actually provided approximately $30,000 to Dr. A. (GE 4; AE C, 
D, E; Tr. 108-122, 129-130, 139-141) 
 
 In late 2006 or early 2007, Dr. A. closed the Chinese company because of lack of 
profit and inability to run the business while residing in the United States for eight 
months of the year. After Company MS closed, Applicant did not close his Corporation 
M U.S. savings account, or move funds from that account. When he was interviewed in 
2008, he remembered that the funds were still in the Corporation M account. The 
account had earned interest since 2004, and in October 2008, he closed the account 
and transferred $120,867 to his personal account. The Corporation M checking account 
had $5,000 as of September 2005. In October 2008, Applicant realized that the 
Corporation M checking account still had funds, and he transferred the $5,000 into his 
personal account. He testified that this $5,000 was a partial repayment of the $30,000 
he had loaned to Dr. A. Both Corporation M accounts are now closed. Applicant has no 
financial assets in China. (GE 6; AE D, E, F, J, L, N; Tr. 121-126, 141-142) 
 
 Applicant has also provided Dr. A. with other funds. In 2001, Dr. A.’s nephew 
could not pay his tuition at medical school, and Dr. A. asked Applicant for help. 
Applicant's nephew was attending school in Russia. Applicant wired $2,000 from his 
personal bank account to a Russian Foreign Students Department. Applicant did not 
note in his 2008 interview whether Dr. A. repaid this loan. Applicant also paid the rent 
for a photography business that Dr. A. operates in their local area. Applicant paid 
$4,000 per month for about 16 months in 2006 and 2007, for a total of about $64,000. In 
describing the money he has given to Dr. A. over the years, Applicant listed a $100,000 
line of credit for Company MS, and an additional $100,000 for Dr. A.’s “personal and 
business needs.” Dr. A. has repaid about $20,000 to $30,000. Applicant does not 
require Dr. A. to repay these funds, because Applicant is financially comfortable. He 
earned $160,000 per year as of 2008, and he provided documentation showing that his 
net worth at the time was approximately $1,200,000. He stated in 2008 that if Dr. A. 
 
 
12 
“needed money for something in the future, then I would probably help him out.” (GE 2; 
AE D, E, F, J. M) 
 
In December 1986, Applicant inappropriately touched a six-year-old child. He 
testified that he was going through a stressful period related to child support and 
custody issues with his ex-wife. He was a federal employee and held a security 
clearance. He was arrested and charged with aggravated sexual assault. The court 
order of October 1991 lists the charge as sexual assault of a child. At court in about 
April 1987, he was given a choice of pleading guilty, and being held in jail each night for 
one year; or pleading “no contest” and receiving “shock probation,” which required 
spending two continuous months incarcerated in the state penitentiary, followed by five 
years of supervised probation, during which he would report to his probation officer 
monthly. Applicant pled “no contest” and was sentenced to “shock probation,” starting 
on August 13, 1987. Applicant was also required to attend counseling, which included 
weekly individual counseling for six months, and monthly group counseling for the 
remainder of his probation.12 Applicant satisfied the court’s order. (GE 1, 2, 4, 5; AE A, 
K; Tr. 61-68) 
 
On October 18, 1991, the court ended Applicant's probation after he served 
slightly more than four years. The court order also set aside the conviction and 
dismissed the indictment. Applicant's attorney at the time told Applicant that he could, in 
good faith, say that he had never been convicted, been in jail, or on probation because 
these events were dismissed by the court. On his security clearance application, 
Applicant disclosed that he had been “charged with or convicted of” a felony offense In 
December 1986. He noted the charge as “aggrivated [sic] sexual assault,” listed the 
name and address of the court, and stated that it was “dismissed 10-91.” During his 
2007 security interview, he provided a copy of the court documents showing the case 
disposition. He testified that he believed that providing the final disposition and the court 
information on his security clearance application would “flag” the arrest so that 
investigators could locate the court records for the details. His employer and family 
members are aware of these facts. (GE 1, 4; AE A, K; Tr. 61-68, 138-139) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
People’s Republic of China  
 
The People’s Republic of China is geographically vast, with a population of more 
than a billion people. Its authoritarian government, controlled by the Chinese 
Communist Party, has a poor human rights record. It suppresses political dissent, 
engages in arbitrary arrests and detention, as well as forced confessions and torture of 
prisoners. The government does not respect freedom of speech, assembly, press, 
religion, or academic or artistic freedom. Chinese authorities monitor communication 
devices such as telephones, faxes, emails, text messages, and internet servers; and 
                                                 
12 Applicant's testimony that he attended counseling for the entire probation period conflicts with his 
affidavit, in which he stated that he attended counseling from June 1987 to June 1988. (GE 2 at p. 104) 
 
 
13 
open domestic and international mail. The U.S. Department of State warns that foreign 
visitors may be placed under surveillance; hotel rooms may be monitored onsite or 
remotely; and personal items in hotel rooms may be searched without the owner’s 
consent or knowledge. Visitors are expected to register with the police within 24 hours 
of arrival in China. 
 
In its 2012 Annual Report to Congress, the Office of the Secretary of Defense 
stated that the PRC is one of “the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security.” Based on cases prosecuted in 2007 and 2008, the 
U.S. Department of Justice indicated that China ranked second only to Iran as the 
leading destination for illegal exports of restricted U.S. technology.  
 
A 2011 DoD report on Chinese military and security developments found that 
China uses “economic espionage, supported by extensive open source research, 
computer network exploitation, and targeted intelligence operations to obtain 
technologies to supplement [its] indigenous military modernization efforts.” In 
discussing China’s acquisition of defense technology, the report noted that the network 
of government-affiliated companies in its military-industrial complex often  
 
enable[s] the PLA [People’s Liberation Army] to access sensitive and dual-
use technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian 
research and development. The enterprises and institutes accomplish this 
through technology conferences and symposia; legitimate contracts and 
joint commercial ventures; partnerships with foreign firms; and joint 
development of specific technologies.”  
 
The same report stated that  
 
China continues to leverage foreign investments, commercial joint 
ventures, academic exchanges, the experience of repatriated PRC 
students and researchers, and state-sponsored industrial/technical 
espionage to increase the level of technologies and expertise available to 
support military research, development, and acquisition. 
 
In its 2009 Annual Report to Congress, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission noted that 
 
Chinese intelligence personnel are more inclined than other foreign 
intelligence services to make use of sympathetic people willing to act as a 
"friend of China." While this most clearly has been seen in PRC-targeted 
recruitment of Chinese-Americans, PRC agents also have used U.S. 
citizens of other ethnic backgrounds as sources. 
 
 
 
14 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.13 Decisions 
also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest14 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.15 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to safeguard 
classified information. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.16 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
                                                 
14 Directive § 6.3. 
15 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
16 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
17 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
15 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 I have considered the conditions under AG ¶ 7 that may be disqualifying, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Applicant 
placed himself in a position of risk of foreign exploitation when he had close and 
continuing contact with his roommate, Dr. A., who was a foreign citizen until 2008. 
Applicant traveled to China six times with Dr. A., and with Dr. A.’s friends and 
professional associates, all of whom were Chinese citizens. They stayed several 
weeks at a time, and Applicant sometimes stayed at their homes, and socialized with 
them and their family members. He also met the Company MS Chinese on-site 
manager and employees. He participated in “new business” fairs that promoted 
Company MS. He sat in on business meetings with city officials about the company. 
The fact that the country at issue is China is an important factor in a heightened risk 
analysis. China is an aggressive perpetrator of economic espionage. Through such 
espionage, it obtains sensitive technologies to enhance its military modernization 
efforts. It targets both Chinese-Americans and those of other ethnic backgrounds to 
gain sensitive information.  
 
 
 
16 
Dr. A was a Chinese citizen during the years the foreign business, Company 
MS, was being developed. Applicant's name was listed as the CFO and a member of 
the board of directors of the U.S. company that partnered with Company MS. 
Therefore, Applicant's name was submitted to Chinese government officials in relation 
to supporting this business as a joint venture and obtaining the government’s joint-
venture benefits. Applicant's activities with Dr. A., his family, and his friends, and his 
association with the Chinese company, created a heightened risk of foreign influence 
or coercion. AG ¶ 7(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) also applies. Applicant's conduct in the years between 1999 and 2008 
demonstrates his close relationship with Dr. A., who was a Chinese citizen. They lived 
and traveled together and had a sexual relationship for seven years during that time 
period. In addition to the $170,000 related to the Chinese company, Applicant paid 
about $100,000 in rent and other expenses for Dr. A. Contrary to Applicant's assertion, 
these facts show that they had a close, spouse-like relationship. It is significant that 
Applicant chose to assist Dr. A. with his business, despite knowing that involvement 
with a foreign company would pose a security concern for him if he applied for a 
clearance. Applicant's conduct raises a potential conflict of interest between his desire 
to help Dr. A. and the need to protect sensitive information.  
 
Applicant shared living quarters with a Chinese citizen from 1999 to 2008. At the 
time, Applicant did not hold a security clearance, but had access to proprietary and 
sensitive information. Applicant continued to share living quarters with Dr. A. after he 
became a United States citizen in 2008, and currently they remain roommates. Based 
on his conduct over the past 13 years, it is clear that Applicant has feelings of affection 
and obligation for Dr. A. The risk of coercion or manipulation is greater where an 
applicant has daily close contact with a person who represents a security concern. 
Although Dr. A. is now a U.S. citizen, he represents a security concern because he has 
family members who are citizens and residents of China with whom he maintains 
contact. He is in touch with one sister about yearly, but talks with his other sister 
monthly, exchanges emails with his nephew several times per year, and talks with him 
monthly. AG ¶ 7(d) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 7(d) also applies because Applicant shared living quarters with numerous 
Chinese citizens during his six visits to China. He lived in the Company MS townhouse, 
provided by the Chinese government, on each visit between January 2004 and June 
2006. For two to three weeks during these visits, he shared the residence with the 
Company MS operating manager, Dr. A., and five or six Chinese employees. Each visit 
presented a risk of foreign manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 Applicant provided approximately $140,000 as a line of credit for the Chinese 
Company MS. Applicant wired two additional loans from his Corporation M savings 
account to a Chinese bank: $15,000 of his own funds and another $15,000 to cover the 
prospective contribution from Dr. W. Applicant was willing to place a substantial portion 
of his assets at Dr. A.’s disposal to assist a foreign-owned and -operated business. 
 
 
17 
Applicant provided these funds at a time when Dr. A. was a Chinese citizen. Most of 
the $30,000 loan has been repaid, and the two companies no longer exist. Although 
Applicant has no current foreign investments, AG ¶ 7(e) applies to the period when 
Applicant provided substantial funds to enable a joint venture with a foreign business. 
  
 I have also considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant no longer has contact with Dr. A.’s friends and associates who joined 
him in the Chinese business venture. However, his conduct demonstrates that he has 
strong ties to Dr. A., who has family in China. Applicant met Dr. A.’s family during at 
least three of his trips to China. He has been willing to help Dr. A.’s family in the past. 
The nature of a country’s government is relevant in assessing vulnerability to 
government coercion.17 The risk of coercion is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, or conducts intelligence operations against 
the United States. China has an authoritarian government that seeks out both Chinese-
Americans and other ethnic groups in its attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information. Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose 
between foreign and U.S. interests. AG¶  8(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has worked for the United States government for years, both as an 
employee and as a contractor. He has held a security clearance in the past. He 
                                                 
17 ISCR Case No. 09-06831 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2011) (“the nature of the foreign government and its 
intelligence-gathering history are important considerations that must be brought to bear on a Judge’s 
ultimate conclusions.”)  
 
 
18 
testified that he enjoyed his work and wished to continue. However, Applicant's 
relationship with Dr. A. raises a potential conflict of interest. Applicant has shown that 
he was willing to acquiesce to requests from a foreign citizen to become involved in a 
joint venture with a foreign company, and provide access to significant sums of money 
as part of the venture. He became involved despite the fact that he knew his 
involvement with a foreign company could pose a security concern. Given his conduct 
over the past 13 years, resulting from his strong ties to Dr. A., I cannot confidently 
conclude that he would resolve a potential conflict of interest in favor or the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
 Dr. A. has ongoing contact with his sister and nephew in China, speaking with 
them monthly, and exchanging emails with his nephew. Although there is no evidence 
that Applicant has contact with them, he has demonstrated his willingness to help Dr. 
A.’s foreign family. Applicant provided funds to Dr. A.’s nephew tuition at a Russian 
medical school as a favor to Dr. A., even though Applicant had met Dr. A.’s nephew 
only once before he wired the funds. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Corporation M and Company MS no longer exist. AG ¶ 8(f) applies because 
Applicant currently has no financial interests in a foreign business.. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 
 
19 
When Applicant completed his security clearance application in January 2006, 
he and Dr. A. had been roommates and sexual partners for about seven years. But 
Applicant did not select the choice that would have accurately described his 
relationship with Dr. A. -- “Adult Currently Living with You.” Instead, he indicated Dr. A. 
lived with him by listing the same address as his own; however, he listed it in another 
state. His claim that he wanted to disclose that Dr. A. lived with him is contradicted by 
his failure to list Dr. A. as “Adult Currently Living with You.” During his investigation, 
Applicant also gave conflicting information about their relationship. He described them 
as “cohabitants” in 2007, but in 2008 he claimed his statement was inaccurate, 
because they were not in a spouse-like relationship. However, they had shared a home 
and had a sexual relationship for seven years, Applicant paid Dr. A.’s living expenses, 
he visited Dr. A.’s family in China, and placed large sums of money at Dr. A.’s disposal. 
The facts show that they did share a close, spouse-like relationship, and were bound 
by ties of affection and obligation, and Applicant deliberately failed to disclose it. 
 
In his security clearance application and during his 2007 security interview, 
Applicant disclosed that he loaned Dr. A. $15,000 for the Chinese business. However, 
this amount is substantially less than the $140,000 he actually placed in the 
Corporation M account. Applicant was aware that involvement with a foreign company 
represented a security issue, and expressed that concern to Dr. A. in 2004. I find that 
Applicant deliberately minimized his financial involvement with a foreign company 
when he reported a substantially lower amount on his application and during the 
interview.  
 
During his investigation, Applicant did not disclose that he had met and 
socialized with several foreign citizens associated with Company MS during his trips to 
China, and that he was a co-member with them on the Corporation M board of 
directors. He testified that he did not report them because he did not have close and 
continuing contact with them. The security clearance application does limit the 
“associate” category to those with close and continuing contact. I conclude Applicant 
was not required to list the foreign nationals on his security clearance application, 
because their interactions did not meet the “close and continuing contact” requirement. 
 
However, the 2007 foreign influence interrogatories asked Applicant to list 
business or professional associates who were foreign citizens or residents, and did not 
limit that category to those with whom Applicant had close and continuing contact. 
Nevertheless, he failed to disclose his contacts with the Chinese citizens involved in 
Corporation M and Company MS. I conclude that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose the foreign nationals on his interrogatory response when he failed to list any 
foreign citizens or residents with whom he had a business or professional association.  
 
Applicant also did not disclose his contacts with the foreign associates in his 
2007 subject interview. He did disclose his contact with Dr. A., who was a foreign 
citizen at the time. I cannot determine if Applicant was asked at this security interview 
about contacts with other foreign citizens. He did discuss the foreign business 
 
 
20 
associates at his two-day interview in 2008. From the evidence presented, I cannot 
conclude that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his foreign business associates 
during his 2007 security interview. 
 
When Applicant completed his security clearance application, he disclosed his 
criminal history by answering “Yes” to the question that asked if he had ever been 
“charged or convicted of” a felony. He then provided the name and date of the charge 
and stated it was dismissed. He also provided the name and the location of the court 
that held the documentation about his court case. He could have been more precise by 
providing details about his conviction and probation. However, I conclude that 
Applicant provided the government with sufficient notice of his criminal conduct, and 
was not deliberately attempting to conceal his history.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his degree of financial involvement in 
Corporation M and Company MS; the extent of his relationship with Dr. A.; and his 
association with several foreign nationals on the board of directors of Corporation M. 
AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. The record contains no evidence that Applicant 
sought to correct or supplement any of his documentation. In 2007, Applicant was sent 
detailed interrogatories specifically related to foreign influence. He did not list the 
foreign contacts he made related to Company MS and stated he loaned Dr. A. only 
$15,000 for the foreign company. In 2012, Applicant had an opportunity to review, 
correct, and supplement the report of his 2007 security interview. He made a few minor 
changes, but did not disclose his contacts with foreign citizens in China, or his financial 
involvement with the foreign company. AG ¶ 17(c) cannot be applied. Although most of 
the case documentation dates from 2006 through 2008, Applicant had a more recent 
chance to disclose the true facts when he reviewed his interrogatories in 2012. He 
again was not forthcoming. Falsification of information provided to the government 
cannot be considered minor misconduct because it undermines the security process, 
which depends on frank and candid answers. Applicant's failure to be forthcoming 
casts doubt on his reliability and good judgment. 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 In evaluating the whole person, I considered that Applicant has provided 
evidence of a strong work ethic and high-quality job performance. He is a U.S. citizen 
and has lived and been educated in the United States. He has been U.S. government 
employee, a DoD contractor, and has held a security clearance. 
 
 However, the facts presented raise serious security concerns. Applicant was a 
mature adult of more than 50 years when he developed a spouse-like relationship with 
Dr. A., a Chinese citizen. Because of that close relationship, he acquiesced to 
becoming involved with a foreign business that Applicant knew raised security 
concerns. He agreed to Dr. A.’s request to put up a substantial portion of his assets at 
the time – approximately $170,000 in total – to help Dr. A. qualify for joint-venture 
benefits from the Chinese government. He met with Dr. A.’s sisters and their families 
during at least three of his visits to China. He wired funds to a Russian school to help 
Dr. A.’s Chinese nephew with tuition. He visited the Chinese embassy 12 times in 
relation to his six trips to China, where he participated in foreign business fairs, sat in 
on foreign business meetings with Chinese officials, resided with Chinese workers, or 
resided in hotels – which are monitored and searched by the Chinese government.  
 
 Applicant also developed a close relationship with Mr. QL, a Chinese nurse. 
Between 2002 and 2004, Mr. QL lived in Applicant's home for several weeks on two 
different occasions. Applicant also paid him and provided him with other benefits while 
he cared for his mother, and they were in close contact during that period. Mr. QL had 
a key to Applicant's home, and he used Applicant's telephone to call family in China. 
 
 
22 
Applicant stayed with Mr. QL’s family in China for one week. They discussed U.S. and 
Chinese medical standardization, and Applicant sent him materials about the topic. In 
2007, Applicant offered his home as a residence for Mr. QL’s son, who wished to come 
to the United States.  
 
 Currently, Applicant remains in a relationship with Dr. A., who is now a U.S. 
citizen, no longer involved with a foreign company, and operates a business in the 
United States. However, Dr. A. has family in China with whom he maintains contact. 
Applicant has helped Dr. A.’s family in the past, which raises questions as to future 
involvement. Doubts also remain about the poor judgment Applicant exercised by his 
willingness to engage in conduct that he knew to be a security concern because of his 
attachment to a foreign citizen. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available 
information shows Applicant has not eliminated the security concerns raised under the 
guidelines for personal conduct and foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g   For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
