 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09165 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 22, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had four delinquent debts totaling $100,304. Only one of the debts has 
been satisfied, and it was satisfied through an involuntary garnishment. Applicant has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 29, 2011, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s Answer to the Statement of Reasons (Answer) was dated August 16, 
2011. Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record, in lieu of a 
 
2 
 
hearing, in his Answer. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on January 18, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
received by Applicant on January 29, 2013. He was afforded 30 days to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did 
not submit any objections or other information within the time period of 30 days after 
receipt of his copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 14, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1997. He has been 
employed with a government contractor since October 2005. He enlisted in the Navy in 
1970, and served on active duty through June 1976. He is married and has two adult 
children. (Item 4.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
has made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR lists four 
delinquent debts totaling $100,304. Applicant denied each of the debts in his Answer. 
(Item 3.) His debts are as follows.  
 
Applicant was indebted on a judgment in the amount of $14,860, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. On or about June 28, 2011, this judgment was satisfied through 
garnishment of Applicant’s wages. Applicant provided a copy of the court-issued 
Satisfaction of Judgment. This debt is resolved. (Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a second mortgage in the amount of $60,000, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt is listed as a charged-off collection account. The debt 
was secured by Applicant’s home, which was foreclosed upon by the primary mortgage 
holder in 2008. Applicant attributes this debt to his wife’s layoff and excessive use of 
credit cards to meet household expenses and purchase building materials to build a 
small cabin. Appellant failed to provide details about his wife’s layoff, including when the 
layoff occurred, the duration of unemployment, and how the layoff specifically impacted 
their ability to meet expenses. This debt has not been resolved. (Item 3; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a bank in the amount of $12,281, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c, and identified by Appellant on his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) dated February 4, 2010. In his Answer, Applicant claimed that this 
debt is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.a. However, Appellant did not produce evidence 
matching the Satisfaction of Judgment to this debt. Applicant had multiple delinquent 
accounts with this creditor, and it is not clear from the record which was satisfied and 
which remain delinquent. In the absence of clear evidence showing this account was a 
duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.a. or that it was paid independent of the judgment, this debt is still 
unresolved. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of 
$13,163, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant presented a letter from this creditor, dated 
 
3 
 
May 12, 2011, indicating, “If this office receives the sum of $10,691 by 05/25/11 (this 
offer will be null and void after 05/25/11), we will accept this as settlement in full.” 
However, Appellant failed to submit proof he paid the settlement or otherwise 
addressed this debt in any manner. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant received financial counseling in March 2007. At that time, he began 
working with a debt settlement program. He paid the debt settlement company $1,507 
per month until he completed the program in May 2011. He settled six of nine debts 
listed in that plan. However, he did little to address the remaining three debts, which are 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d. Applicant claimed in his Answer that he is “living 
today totally within [his] means (cash, no credit) trying to rebuild.” However his most 
recent credit report reflects that he has a credit card with a balance of $7,605. (Item 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
4 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that remained unpaid for a 
substantial period of time. He failed to produce evidence to show he has the means to 
satisfy his remaining delinquent accounts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant resolved SOR ¶ 1.a through involuntary 
garnishment. He failed to meet his burden to produce evidence to show he has 
addressed the remaining three debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant explained in his Answer that he incurred 
his debts as a result of his wife’s unemployment. Her unemployment was beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, Applicant failed to introduce evidence of the breadth and 
scope of her unemployment or show the effect it had on their financial situation. Further, 
to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did responsibly address some of his past debts from March 
2007 to May 2011. However, Applicant failed to produce evidence that he has taken 
responsible actions to address his remaining delinquent accounts since May 2011. I am 
unable to make a determination that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant attended financial counseling and participated in a debt settlement 
program from March 2007 to May 2011. He satisfied six debts through the help of the 
financial counseling service. However, none of the debts listed on the SOR were 
satisfied through the counseling. There is no evidence that Applicant’s remaining 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. 
The Appeal Board has held, “satisfaction of a debt through the involuntary 
establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith 
initiation of repayment by the debtor.”1 Therefore, this condition is not applicable to SOR 
¶ 1.a. The record fails to establish that any payments have been made on any of his 
remaining debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009.) 
 
6 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to show that he was in the process of formally 
disputing any of the debts on the SOR or that he had successfully disputed any of these 
debts in the past. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant failed 
to address his financial delinquencies. As a result, one debt was repaid through 
garnishment. The other three debts appear to remain unresolved. While his wife did 
experience a period of unemployment, without more information on their financial 
circumstances during that time, I cannot find that the unemployment was a mitigating 
factor. Applicant still utilizes a credit card, despite his statement to the contrary. He 
presented no plan to address the remaining delinquencies. Continuation of these 
circumstances is highly likely, and the potential for coercion, exploitation, or duress 
remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
