 
1 
 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-10892 
                                                            )                      
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption; Guideline H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                      Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed several requests for consideration for security clearances. 
On January 29, 1992, he completed a Department of Defense (DOD) National Agency 
Questionnaire (NAQ). On February 18, 1999, he completed a security clearance 
application (SF-86). On May 25, 1999, he completed another SF-86. On June 9, 2004, 
he completed a third SF-86. On March 16, 2010, Applicant completed and signed an 
electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP). On June 20, 2012, the 
DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption; Guideline H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 28, 2012. He declined a hearing, and 
requested a decision on the written record. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
responded specifically to each allegation under Guideline G. However, he did not 
respond specifically to the allegations under Guidelines H and E. At my request, 
Department Counsel contacted Applicant and asked him to respond specifically to each 
allegation under Guideline H and Guideline E. Applicant complied on February 13, 
2013, and his amended answer to the SOR is entered in the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I.   
 
The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 5, 
2012. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 15. On December 
5, 2012, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information and objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received 
the file on December 19, 2012. His response was due on January 18, 2013. He timely 
submitted one document containing additional information, but he did not file any 
objections. On January 30, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked 
Applicant’s response to the FORM as Item A and admitted it to the record without 
objection.     
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.); three allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline H, Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2. c.);  and five 
allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (¶¶ 3.a. 
through 3.e.). In his amended Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations 
under the three guidelines. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  (Item 
1; Item 3; Item 4; HE I.) 
  
 Applicant is 49 years old and a high school graduate. He married for the first time 
in March 1986. He and his first wife divorced in June 1996. Applicant married for a 
second time in July 1998. He and his second wife divorced in January 2000. Applicant 
married for a third time in April 2005. According to Applicant’s treatment notes in the 
record, his third wife is a cocaine user. Applicant has two adult sons from his first 
marriage. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 12.) 
 
 Applicant has worked for his present employer, a government contractor, or its 
predecessor, for approximately 27 years. His current position title is Manager III Supply 
Chain Management. He was first granted a security clearance in 1992. In about 1998 or 
1999 and again in 2005, Applicant’s security clearance was renewed. (Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has a history of substance abuse. He used marijuana on multiple 
occasions between 1979 and 1985. Between January 2000 and June 2007, he used 
cocaine one or two times a week. From December 2007 until May 2008, he used 
cocaine daily. From 2003 until at least November 2008, he consumed alcohol to excess 
or to the point of intoxication. Applicant’s cocaine and alcohol abuse are alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.f. and 2.a. (Item 9; Item 12; Item 13.) 
 
 On June 5, 1992, Applicant provided a signed, sworn statement to an authorized 
investigator. In the statement, Applicant reported that his first use of alcohol occurred 
when he was in the seventh grade. In February 1983, Applicant was charged with 
Driving Under the Influence (DUI). He pled no contest to the charge, was fined 
approximately $200, and his license was suspended for 30 days. Applicant’s 1983 DUI 
is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. In January 1985, Applicant was again charged with DUI. He 
pled no contest to the charge, was fined approximately $200, and his license was 
suspended for 30 days. Applicant’s 1985 DUI is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (Item 5; Item 9.) 
 
 In his June 1992 signed, sworn statement, Applicant told the investigator that he 
drank three to four beers a weekend from 1985 until 1992. Applicant also stated he had 
no future intention to drink alcohol. (Item 9.) 
 
 In a statement to an authorized investigator in July 2010, Applicant stated that his 
heaviest alcohol consumption occurred between 2000 and 2007. During those years, he 
drank about three times a week, consuming each time eight or nine beers along with 
two shots of tequila.  (Item 13.)  
 
 In 2004 and 2005, Applicant provided affidavits to authorized investigators in 
which he stated that he “didn’t really start drinking until [his] first marriage in 1996.” By 
2003, he stated, his marital problems had increased, and he was drinking a pint of hard 
liquor every night. In December 2003, he enrolled in a detoxification program because 
he was experiencing nausea and tremors that he could not manage himself. In the 
detoxification program, Applicant was treated with medication. He did not receive 
counseling. Applicant told the investigator that he did not have a problem with alcohol, 
and, since his treatment, he no longer drank alcohol. Applicant’s detoxification treatment 
is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 On a day in July 2008, Applicant reported for work at 8:00 am. His coworkers 
smelled alcohol on his breath and reported him to his supervisor. His supervisor 
directed him to the employee assistance program (EAP). In July and August 2008, 
Applicant attended an alcohol treatment program, where he was diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence and cocaine dependence, in early partial remission. He was discharged 
from this program for non-cooperation. Applicant’s diagnoses and discharge for non-
cooperation are alleged at SOR 1.a. His cocaine dependence diagnosis is also alleged 
at SOR ¶ 2.b. (Item 12.) 
 
 From November 2008 to January 2009, Applicant attended alcohol treatment at a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. He was diagnosed with alcohol dependence in 
 
4 
 
 
early partial remission and with cocaine dependence in sustained full remission. He was 
discharged from the treatment program with the recommendation that he begin 
aftercare. Applicant’s diagnoses, treatment, and discharge are alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. 
His diagnosis of cocaine dependence is also alleged at SOR ¶ 2.b. (Item 12.) 
 
 Concurrently, Applicant participated in therapeutic counseling with a licensed 
social worker from December 2008 to February 2009. The licensed social worker 
diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent. Applicant’s treatment and diagnosis are 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. (Item 15.) 
 
 From February 2009 to March 2010, Applicant attended aftercare services 
provided by a recognized alcohol treatment program. While Applicant was initially active 
and responsible in the aftercare program, his attendance decreased over time. 
Eventually, he reported that his work schedule was “too hectic” for him to continue to 
participate in aftercare and Alcoholics Anonymous. His therapist concluded:  
 
These behaviors could be ‘triggers for relapse’ if not appropriately 
addressed. [Applicant] had completed only ‘15’ sessions of Aftercare when 
he contacted his agency and indicated he was no longer going to be able 
to continue to attend Aftercare[,]despite encouragement by staff that he 
continue. Prognosis is guarded. (Item 12.) 
   
Applicant’s participation in aftercare, his decision to discontinue aftercare, and the effect 
of that decision upon his prognosis are alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 12.) 
 
 After he was granted a renewal of his security clearance in 1998 or 1999, and in 
2005, Applicant used illegal drugs on multiple occasions. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.c. that 
Applicant used illegal drugs while holding a DOD security clearance. (Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 During his work assignments as a government contractor, Applicant completed 
security clearance applications in January 1992, February and May 1999, June 2004, 
and March 2010. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant completed a National Agency Questionnaire (NAC) on January 29, 
1992. Question 20a on the NAC asked the following: 
 
Have you ever tried or used or possessed any narcotic (to include heroin 
or cocaine), depressant (to include quaaludes), stimulant, hallucinogen (to 
include LSD or PCP), of cannabis (to include marijuana or hashish), or 
any mind-altering substance (to include glue or paint), even one-time or on 
an experimental basis, except as prescribed by a licensed physician? 
 
Applicant responded “yes” to Question 20a and listed a one-time use of marijuana in the 
fall of 1979. He failed to report that he had used marijuana on multiple occasions 
between 1979 and at least 1985. The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.a. that Applicant’s omission of 
his marijuana use between 1979 and 1985 was deliberate. (Item 1; Item 8.) 
 
5 
 
 
 In June 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-86). 
Question 27 on the SF-86 asked the following: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “No” to Question 27. He did not list his cocaine use beginning in 
2000 and which continued throughout 2004. The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.b. that Applicant’s 
omission of his cocaine use was deliberate. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Question 28 on the SF-86 that Applicant completed in June 2004 also asked the 
following: “Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a 
law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security 
clearance; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting public safety?” 
Applicant answered “No” to Question 28 and did not list his cocaine use while 
possession a security clearance. The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.c. that Applicant’s failure to list 
his cocaine use while holding a security clearance was deliberate. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 In March 2010, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Question 23a on the e-QIP asks the following: 
 
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? 
 
Applicant answered “No” to Question 23a. He failed to list his cocaine use on multiple 
occasions between 2000 and 2008. The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.d. that Applicant’s failure to 
list his cocaine use was deliberate. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Question 23b on the e-QIP Applicant completed in March 2010 asks the 
following: “Have you EVER used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance; while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom 
official; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?” 
Applicant answered “No” to Question 23b and failed to list his cocaine use while 
possessing a DOD security clearance. The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.e. that Applicant’s failure 
to list his cocaine use while holding a security clearance was deliberate. (Item 1; Item 
4.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 In a one-page response to the FORM, Applicant stated that while he was 
embarrassed by the decisions he made in the past, he was now making positive 
decisions as the result of counseling and was proud of his present life. He denied he 
was ever a threat to national security. He considered himself to be a good person and 
was proud to work as a government contractor. (Item A.) 
  
                                         Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, an 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
                                      Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
7 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise 
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability.” AG ¶ 21. 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions. I 
conclude that Guideline G disqualifying conditions at ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), and 22(e) 
apply in Applicant’s case. AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(b) reads: “alcohol-related 
incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired 
condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(e) reads: “evaluation of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment center.” 
  
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol involvement. In 1983 and 1985, he was 
arrested and charged with DUI. In both cases, he pled no contest, his driver’s license 
was suspended, and he was fined. From 2003 until 2008, Applicant consumed alcohol 
to excess or to the point of intoxication. In 2003, he self-referred to a detoxification 
center when he was unable to manage the nausea and tremors that resulted from his 
 
8 
 
 
excessive use of alcohol. In July 2008, he came to work smelling of alcohol. His 
coworkers reported him to his supervisor, who referred him to the company’s EAP. 
Applicant attended an alcohol treatment program, where he was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. Additionally, he sought additional counseling, and he was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent by a licensed clinical social worker. Applicant’s history of alcohol 
involvement raises the Guideline G disqualifying conditions identified at AG ¶¶ 22(a), 
22(b), 22(c), and 22(e).  
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23(d) if “the individual has 
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with 
any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” 
  
 Applicant is now 49 years old. His excessive use of alcohol began in the 1980s 
and continued until at least 2008. He has been diagnosed as alcohol dependent, was 
discharged from one alcohol treatment program for non-cooperation, completed another 
program, and was recommended for aftercare. From February 2009 until March 2010, 
he participated in aftercare services, but failed to comply with the program’s aftercare 
recommendations. Noting this, his therapist provided a guarded prognosis. Applicant’s 
excessive use of alcohol was habitual over a period of many years and happened under 
circumstances that could recur, thereby raising concerns about his reliability. I conclude, 
therefore, that AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 It is not clear from the record that Applicant has acknowledged his alcohol 
dependence and has established and maintained a pattern of abstinence. I conclude 
that AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
 
 Applicant has worked for his employer for approximately 27 years. He was 
initially referred to a treatment program by his employer. Because he failed to follow 
aftercare recommendations, however, his therapist provided a guarded prognosis. 
Moreover, it is not clear from the record that he is making satisfactory progress toward 
sobriety. I conclude that AG ¶ 23(c) and AG ¶ 23(d) do not apply in this case. 
  
 
9 
 
 
 Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
 The record establishes that Applicant used marijuana, at various times, from 
1979 to 1985. Between January 2000 and June 2007, he used cocaine one or two times 
a week. From December 2007 until May 2008, he used cocaine daily. In July 2008, he 
was diagnosed with cocaine dependence in early partial remission at a recognized drug 
treatment facility. In November 2008, he was diagnosed with cocaine dependence in 
sustained remission. Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 1992. His 
clearance was renewed in 1998 or 1999 and again in 2005. Applicant used illegal drugs 
while holding a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. It also raises security concerns about his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use and his use of 
cocaine after being granted a security clearance raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
25(a), 25(e), and 25(g). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].”  
AG 25(e) reads: “evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program.” AG ¶ 
25(g) reads: “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Three Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on [his] 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an “intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of his security clearance for any violation,” then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. If 
Applicant provided evidence of “satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional,” then AG 26(d) might be applicable.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant used cocaine one or two times a week from 2000 until 2007. From 
December 2007 until May 2008, he used cocaine daily. His drug use was sustained and 
habitual. He was twice diagnosed with cocaine dependence. His drug use occurred 
while he held a DOD security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s past illegal drug use continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  Applicant provided no information to demonstrate 
his intent not to abuse drugs in the future. He failed to provide documentation 
establishing that he had abstained from drug use for an appropriate period or that he 
had disassociated from those with whom he had used drugs in the past. He failed to 
demonstrate that he had changed his conduct to avoid environments where drugs are 
used. He did not provide a signed statement of his intent not to abuse drugs in the 
future, with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred periodically over a period of many years.  
Insufficient time has elapsed to demonstrate whether he will abstain from illegal drug 
use in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(d) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant completed a NAC in 1992, an SF-86 in 2004, and an e-QIP in 2010. 
When he completed the NAC, he admitted a one-time use of marijuana in 1997. He did 
not disclose his marijuana use between 1979 and at least 1985. When he completed his 
SF-86 in 2004 and his e-QIP in 2010, he failed to disclose his cocaine use and his use 
of cocaine while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s personal conduct raises 
security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a), AG ¶ 16(d)(3), and AG ¶ 16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(a) 
reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
AG ¶ 16(d)(3) reads: “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports a 
whole person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
 
11 
 
 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations.” 
 
AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . .  .”    
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he failed to accurately report 
his marijuana use on the NAC he executed in 1992. He also admitted that he falsified 
his answers on his 2004 SF-86 and his 2010 e-QIP by failing to report his illegal use of 
cocaine and his use of cocaine while holding a security clearance.  
 
 Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
 Additionally, AG ¶ 17(d) might apply in mitigation if “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to occur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
   
 Applicant is a mature adult who has, in the course of his employment as a 
government contractor, completed several security clearance applications. He knew, or 
should have known, of the importance of telling the truth to the Government when 
seeking a security clearance. He also knew that his drug use was substantial and would 
raise security concerns, especially when it became known that he used illegal drugs 
while holding a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant made no good-faith efforts to correct the falsifications in his NAC, SF-
86, and e-QIP before being confronted with the facts. He did not claim that the 
falsifications occurred as a result of improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel. His falsifications were neither minor nor infrequent. Instead, they appear to 
 
12 
 
 
constitute a pattern and cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant has received counseling for his alcohol-related behavior, but it is not 
clear from the record that these treatments have alleviated the factors that caused 
Applicant’s pattern of dishonesty and rule violations. Moreover, Applicant’s falsifications 
of his illegal drug use made him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
Applicant provided no assurances that he has taken steps to reduce or eliminate those 
vulnerabilities. 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the documentary evidence in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant used cocaine from 2000 until 2008 after being granted a security clearance. I 
also conclude that his falsifications in his 1992 NAC, his 2004 SF-86, and his 2010 e-
QIP were deliberate. Accordingly, none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances raised by the written record in this case. Applicant has 
worked for his present employer for almost 27 years. Applicant’s alcohol and drug use 
over many years raises serious concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability.  
 
When he executed his security clearance applications in 1992, 2004, and 2010, 
Applicant was not forthcoming about his illegal drug use. Because the Government did 
not know about Applicant’s drug use, it trusted him with a security clearance. Applicant 
then continued his drug use while entrusted with a security clearance. Applicant’s lack 
of candor raises serious security concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. 
 
13 
 
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion in mitigating the security 
concerns under the alcohol consumption, drug involvement, and personal conduct 
adjudicative guidelines. Overall, the record evidence in this case leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a. - 1.h.:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:              AGAINST APPLICANT   
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.c.:  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
