                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-09625
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 1, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires For Investigations Processing
on December 22, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On October 5, 2012, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on November 5, 2012, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on December 6, 2012.  A notice of hearing was issued on December 12,
2012, scheduling the hearing for January 17, 2013.  At the hearing the Government
presented  four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4 that were
admitted without objection.  The Applicant called one witness and presented seven
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G that were admitted without
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of
business on January 24, 2013, to allow the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional
documentation.  The Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit referred to as
2
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A which was admitted without objection.  The official
transcript (Tr.) was received on January 29, 2013.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in Israel.  The Applicant had no objection.
(Tr. p. 18.)  The requested administrative notice was taken.  The requests and the
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 54 years of age and has a Ph.D in Applied
Mathematics and a Masters in Science Degree in Electrical Engineering.  He is
employed as a Project Manager for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant admitted the two allegations set forth under this guideline of the
SOR.  The Applicant was born in Israel in 1958.  He grew up in Israel and moved to the
United States in 1987, at the age of twenty seven, to complete his Post-doctoral studies.
He served a three year mandatory term of enlistment in the Israeli Army.  He met his
wife in 1988, and they were married in 1989.  She is a native-born American citizen.  It
was at that time that he decided to make the United States his permanent home.  They
have two adult children who are attending American Universities.  He became a
naturalized citizen of the United States in October 1993.  In 2005, the Applicant and his
wife revoked the Israeli citizenship of their children automatically given to them at birth.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  They did this to ensure that they would not have to serve in the
Israeli military.  (Tr. p 45.)  The Applicant indicates that he is willing to renounce his
Israeli citizenship if it is necessary in order to obtain a security clearance.  (Tr. p. 63.)  
The Applicant has worked for his current employer since 1989, for twenty-three
years.  (Tr. p 57.)  He has held a security clearance in the past but it was allowed to
lapse when it was no longer needed.  He has never had a security violation nor has he
been counseled or disciplined for any misconduct.  (Tr. p 58.)  Over the years he has
held positions of increasing responsibilities including Group Supervisor, Deputy Section
Manager and Project Manager.  He now holds the highest regular technical rank at this
company, as Principal Technologist.  He has received numerous awards and
recognitions for his contributions to the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibits E and F.)
3
The Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens and residents of Israel.  His mother
is 78 years old and is a retired teacher.  His sister is 53 years old and is a teacher.  Her
husband is a commercial pilot.  The Applicant contacts his mother on a weekly basis for
about five minutes by skype calls, and with his sister through a few telephone calls per
year.  He visits his mother and sister in Israel once a year.  As a family, they visit Israel
once every five years or so.  His mother and sister do not know about his security
clearance application or any projects that he is working on.
The Applicant last traveled to Israel in December 2012.  When he travels he uses
his United States passport, as he does not possess an Israeli passport.  (Tr. p. 64)  The
Applicant has no assets of any kind in Israel.  In the unlikely event that the United
States got into a conflict with Israel, the Applicant testified that he would follow his
explicit loyalties to the United States.  He also testified that his feelings toward his wife
and children are much stronger than his feelings toward his mother.  (Tr. p. 61.)  The
Applicant testified that he would never give classified or restricted information to anyone
under any circumstances that is not authorized.
All of the Applicant’s property and financial assets are in the United States.  He
has a house, a bank account and a retirement fund.  He estimates his net worth at
about a million and a quarter dollars.  (Tr. p. 50. and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit
A.)  He provides no financial support to his mother or sister in Israel.  (Tr. p. 33.)
A letter from the Applicant’s supervisor who has known the Applicant for over
twenty years, indicates that the Applicant has been one of his highest performing
employees due to Applicant’s outstanding technical skills, ingenuity, dedication and hard
work.  The Applicant has at times helped him with the management responsibility for
over 100 engineers in his section.  The Applicant is described as loyal to his superiors,
honest, caring, direct and ethical.  He has received multiple awards for his many
valuable and important contributions to the defense industry.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
Letters of recommendation from other professional colleagues and long time
friends who know the Applicant well or have worked with him attests to his impeccable
character, loyalty, and hard working nature.  They also consider him to be caring,
trustworthy, and dependable.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the country of Israel.
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government and
exercises executive power.  Israel has a diversified technologically advanced economy
that is growing at five percent annually.  The United States is Israel’s largest trading
partner.  The threat of terrorist attacks in Israel is an on-going concern.  Terrorist
organizations have launched rockets and mortars from the Gaza Strip.  The U.S.
government has previously issued warnings that American citizens, including tourists,
students, residents, and U.S. mission personnel, have been injured or killed by terrorists
while in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza.  As a result, American citizens have been
urged to exercise a high degree of caution when visiting places associated with U.S.
interests and/or located near U.S. official buildings.  The United States and Israel have
developed a close friendship based on common democratic values, religious affinities,
and security interests.  There are some issues in U.S. - Israeli relations.  The United
4
States is concerned with Israeli military sales to China, inadequate Israeli protection of
U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-related cases involving Israeli citizens.      
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern, which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
7.(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion; and
7.(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information; and
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
5
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S; and 
8.(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest;
8.(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which the participation was voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
6
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct is unlikely to be repeated and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who is subject to foreign influence may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
The Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security
clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all
places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 7.(b)
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information apply.  Mitigating Condition 8.(a) the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S., 8.(b)
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
7
interest, and 8.(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation are also applicable. 
It is noted that the current political situation in Israel elevates the cause for
concern in this case. The evidence shows that the Applicant was born in Israel, but
since moving to the United States he has lived the American dream.  He became a
naturalized United States citizen in 1993.  For the past twenty-five years he has lived in
the United States where he has established his home and his family.  His wife and
children are native-born American citizens.  He also has long standing  friends and work
associates in the United States.  He has devoted his work and academic training to
advancing the capabilities and interests of the United States for the past twenty-three
years.  Furthermore, all of his assets of any kind are in the United States.  There is no
conflict of interest here because of the Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the United States. 
The Applicant admits that he has some limited contact with his mother and sister
in Israel.  However, this contact is minimal.  His mother, who is elderly and retired, and
his sister are not affiliated with the Israeli government.  They do not know anything
about what the Applicant does for the United States nor does he plan to ever tell them.
When he travels to Israel to visit his mother and sister, he uses an American passport.
Thus, it is unlikely that the Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of the Israeli government and the interests of the United States.
The possibility of Foreign Influence does not exist nor could it create the potential for
conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is
not vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline
B (Foreign Influence).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is willing to renounce his
Israeli citizenship and he has previously surrendered his Israeli passport.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the
guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgment,
trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified
information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that his ties to the United States are much
stronger than any ties to Israel.  He is a loyal American who long ago committed himself
to this country by declaration and by action.  He has demonstrated that he is a valuable
member of American society and its institutions.  He is sufficiently trustworthy, and
clearly meets the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
8
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara.1.a.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
