 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07491 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 23, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2013, and initially requested a 
decision without a hearing. Government Counsel requested a hearing on February 5, 
2013.1 The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2013. The Defense Office of 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
 
2 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 15, 2013, setting 
the hearing for February 28, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted into evidence without objections. Applicant testified, but did not 
offer any documentary evidence at the time. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. She submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C in a 
timely manner. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 7, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement contemplated by the 
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, paragraph E.3.1.8. Additionally, Department 
counsel indicated she orally notified Applicant on February 6th about the hearing date 
and location, which is more than 15 days from hearing date.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and is seeking a security clearance for the first time. 
She is a quality assurance-production control clerk for a government contractor and has 
worked for the contractor since 2008. She has a high school diploma. She is divorced 
and has two adult children.3  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has two federal tax liens in the total amount of 
$26,371. The liens were listed on credit reports for November and March 2012, and 
March 2011. Applicant admitted both liens. These admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. 4  
 
 The tax liens were for unpaid federal income taxes for tax years 1994, 2002, 
2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. Applicant worked and supported her two 
children pretty much as a single mother. Although she was married on several 
occasions, none of her former husbands provided regular financial support for her and 
her children. When she was working at an earlier job, she was advised by a coworker to 
file “exempt” regarding her federal taxes and this would provide her more income. She 
did so and then did not ever change her status back to begin paying payroll taxes again. 
Consequently, she did not file federal income tax returns for a number of years. 
Knowing that she probably owed taxes began to weigh on her. In 2010, she visited the 
local IRS office seeking assistance. The IRS helped her prepare and file her tax returns 
for the years she failed to do so. Applicant also entered into a payment plan to begin 
paying the back taxes she owed for those years. She began paying $100 monthly under 
the payment plan in January 2011 and continued until January 2012. While she was 
making payments under the payment plan to the IRS, she filed for bankruptcy protection 
under Chapter 7 for debts unrelated to the SOR. Her bankruptcy attorney advised her 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 11-12. 
 
3 Tr. at 5, 24, 49; GE 1. 
 
4 Answer to SOR (Ans). 
 
 
3 
 
that her debts to the IRS would also be discharged. After receiving this advice, she 
stopped making payments to the IRS. The IRS filed liens against Applicant in June 
2010. Applicant became aware of these liens when she applied for her security 
clearance. In December 2012, she reinitiated contact with the IRS and requested to 
enter into a payment plan. The IRS accepted Applicant’s request for a payment plan 
and set up automatic withdrawals from her bank account beginning in March 2013. She 
made her January and February 2013 payments to the IRS by check and money order. 
Her payments are currently $25 per month and will increase over time ($75 in 2014 and 
$480 in 2015).5   
 
 Applicant is current on all her other financial obligations. All of her state tax 
returns have been filed and she does not owe on them. Her 2012 federal tax return was 
filed and her tax year overpayment was automatically applied to her previous tax 
liability.6 
 
 Applicant provided her performance appraisals for 2009 and 2010, and a letter 
explaining why her company has not issued performance appraisals for 2011 and 2012. 
Her appraisals both score in the top range possible, which is “outstanding.” She 
received debt counseling through her bankruptcy case.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25; 28, 31-32, 38-41, 43-44; GE 4; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 48, 50; AE A. 
 
7 AE B; Ans. 
 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
  Applicant had multiple liens filed resulting from her federal tax debt. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The liens attributed to Applicant were recent and numerous. She has established 
a payment plan that will allow her to pay her tax obligations. She filed tax returns for all 
the years she failed to do so. It is unlikely these type of debts will recur, nor do they cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially 
applies.  
 
Applicant’s tax liens were due to her claiming an “exempt” status and failure to 
file income tax returns. These were conditions within her control. The advice she 
received from her bankruptcy attorney about the discharge of her tax deficiencies was 
incorrect and was a condition beyond her control. The incorrect advice set her back in 
her efforts to resolve the tax liens. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant received counseling through her bankruptcy, but more importantly, she 
sought the assistance of the IRS. The IRS was able to help her file her missing tax 
returns and set up a reasonable payment plan. She made a good-faith effort to resolve 
the liens listed on the SOR. She supplied documentary evidence showing her payments 
under the plan with the IRS. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to her 
tax liability. She set up a workable plan with the IRS to repay her tax obligation. I also 
found that she is an outstanding performer, as indicated by her work performance 
appraisals. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood that Applicant would find herself in a 
similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
    
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
