 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04697 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph A. Velez, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns raised by the failure of his real estate investments. Applicant established that 
his is not responsible for the SOR debt by operation of his state’s anti-deficiency statute 
and that he has paid $70,000 of non-SOR debt related to his real estate venture. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2012, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on December 12, 2012, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant timely submitted AE H through L, which I admitted without objection. I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on December 20, 2012. 
 
Administrative Notice Documents 
 
Applicant offered documents regarding State 1’s anti-deficiency statute, case law 
interpreting the statute, as well as information from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
regarding the treatment of foreclosures on federal taxes for administrative notice. These 
documents are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) A through F. The 
Government did not object, but requested permission to file a post-hearing submission 
briefing its position on the applicability of the anti-deficiency statute. Department 
Counsel failed to submit a post-hearing submission within the time allotted.2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant’s counsel waived the notice 
requirement, electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, is an engineer employed by a federal contractor. He has held a 
security clearance since 2001, without incident. Since he began working with his current 
employer in 2004, Applicant has been consistently rated as an employee who exceeds 
expectations. His performance has been recognized on several occasions by the 
government agency he supports. Between 2008 and 2012, Applicant received bonus 
awards from his employer in recognition for his outstanding work. The security concerns 
in this case arise from the 2010 foreclosures of two rental properties Applicant owned.4  
 
 In 2004, Applicant received a $70,000 windfall from the sale of a home in another 
state. Upon moving to State 1, Applicant decided he needed to invest the money. After 
researching and comparing other investment opportunities, Applicant decided to invest 
the majority of the $70,000 in State 1’s then-booming real estate market. He 
investigated comparable home sales, researched the local rental market, and consulted 
                                                          
2 Tr. 42-44. 
 
3 Tr. 9-10. 
 
4 GE 1; AE I – K. 
 
 
3 
 
real estate and mortgage professionals. Between October and December 2005, 
Applicant purchased two properties: Alpha, a single-family home situated on .05 acres 
for $235.000; and Beta, a single-family home situated on .21 acres for approximately 
$236,000. He contracted to buy a third property during the pre-construction phase: 
Charlie, a brownstone sitting on 1 acre of land. Applicant financed Alpha and Beta using 
80/10/10 financing, securing a primary mortgage for 80% of the purchase price, a 
second mortgage for 10% of the purchase price, and paying the remaining 10% of the 
purchase price in cash. The primary mortgages on Alpha and Beta were secured by 
separate deeds of trusts, which allowed the mortgage holder to foreclose on the 
respective property and sell it to recover the unpaid balance of the loan in the event 
Applicant defaulted.5 
 
 Applicant’s long-term plan was to live in Charlie upon its 2007 delivery date, and 
maintain Alpha and Beta as rental properties. In the meantime, he lived in Alpha and 
decided to remodel the Beta property. Applicant believed that remodeling Beta would 
make it more attractive to renters and make it easier to sell, if necessary. He anticipated 
that the Beta renovation would cost $40,000 and take six months to complete. Applicant 
expected to have renters in Beta by April 2006 and was prepared to financially maintain 
Alpha and Beta until then, using his savings and income. However, the Beta remodel 
took two years longer and $40,000 more to complete than Applicant estimated. By late 
2006, Applicant realized that he could not afford to maintain both properties without any 
rental income. In an effort to reduce his financial obligations, Applicant tried to sell Alpha 
in September 2006. Around the same time Applicant listed the house for sale, the police 
searched the home of Applicant’s neighbor and charged the neighbor with a series of 
sexual assaults and murders that terrorized the city for some time. As the case, and 
Applicant’s street, received extensive media coverage, interest in Applicant’s property 
declined and the house did not sell. As a result, Applicant installed renters in the 
property, but the rent did not cover all of the property’s expenses. Even though he was 
having financial difficulty maintaining the properties, Applicant decided not to renege on 
the Charlie purchase because it did not have any recurring monthly costs during the 
construction phase and he did not want to lose the $15,000 down payment he made on 
the property. Applicant also believed he could salvage the situation with the other two 
properties before the Charlie’s 2007 delivery date.6  
 
 In May 2007, Applicant refinanced Alpha, replacing the 80/10/10 financing with a 
traditional loan secured by a deed of trust. He withdrew the equity in the home and used 
the proceeds to fund some of the Beta remodeling costs. He also paid the closing costs 
on Charlie and moved into the property as planned. By the time Applicant completed the 
Beta renovation in late 2007, he had exhausted his savings, borrowed from his 401(k), 
and began relying on credit cards to pay his living expenses as well as the expenses 
related to the Alpha and Beta properties, which totaled approximately $4,000 each 
                                                          
5 Tr. 51-53, 55, 82, 88, 112, 124-125; GE 4-5; AE E. 
 
6 Tr. 54, 56, 60, 84-86, 89-92, 102, 108-113; GE 5. 
 
 
4 
 
month. Applicant listed Beta for sale in early 2008. Unable to sell Beta, Applicant also 
rented the property for an operating loss.7  
 
 In 2008, Applicant was living in Charlie and renting the other two properties as 
planned. However, with his savings exhausted and his credit card debt high, he still 
struggled to support the three properties. Applicant attempted to refinance Charlie to 
secure a lower interest rate and withdraw equity from the property, but he could not 
afford the closing costs on the loan. In the fall of 2008, he negotiated lower interest 
rates on the Alpha and Beta properties, but according to Applicant, the modification was 
too little, too late. He tried selling Alpha again in 2008 and Charlie in 2010, but the real 
estate market had already started its decline, and Applicant could not convince the 
mortgagers to accept short sales on either property.8 
 
 By 2009 Applicant was financially overwhelmed. Although he was current on all 
of his financial obligations, Applicant realized that he could not maintain the three 
properties and the $100,000 in credit card debt he accumulated trying to manage them. 
In addition, Applicant’s 2009 marriage and resulting higher income tax bracket, caused 
a less favorable tax treatment of the operating losses generated by the Beta and Alpha 
properties. Applicant consulted his tax accountant for advice. The tax accountant 
referred him to a real estate attorney, who advised Applicant that his properties were 
covered by State 1’s anti-deficiency law, which states:9  
 
If a trust property of two and one-half aces or less which is limited to and 
utilized for either a single one-family or a single two-family dwelling is sold 
pursuant to the trustee’s power of sale, no action may be maintained to 
recover any difference in the amount obtained by the sale and the amount 
of the indebtedness and any interest, costs, and expenses.10 
 
 In enacting the statute, State 1’s legislature intended to protect certain 
homeowners from the financial disasters of losing their homes to foreclosure plus all of 
their other non-exempt property on the execution of a judgment for the balance of the 
purchase price. As long as the subject property fits the description in the statute, the 
protection applies to primary residences and investment properties. State 1’s Supreme 
Court, guided by this statutory intent, held that this deficiency protection applies to 
second mortgages, even if the second mortgage holder did not exercise its rights under 
the second deed of trust. The courts have also extended to the protection to cash-out 
refinance mortgages under certain circumstances.11  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 57-59, 61, 88-89, 93-95, 103-105, 114, 117-118, 123-124; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 52, 63-66, 95, 118; GE 5. 
 
9 Tr. 67-71, 107; GE 5. 
 
10 HE A. 
 
11 HE B-D. 
 
 
5 
 
 Before making a decision, Applicant informed his facility security officer (FSO), in 
writing, about the financial problems he was having related to the rental properties. He 
informed the FSO that he would try to dispose of the properties by short sale or 
strategic default, if necessary. After evaluating his options, Applicant decided to 
strategically default on the mortgages for all three properties. He stopped making 
mortgage payments in February 2010. Each of the primary mortgage holders for 
Charlie, Alpha, and Beta foreclosed on the properties and exercised their rights under 
the deed of trust to sell their respective property. Beta sold in October 2010 for $96,200. 
Alpha sold in December 2010 for $157,000 and Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C 
Cancellation of Debt (1099-C) from the creditor. Charlie sold in November 2011 for 
$134,500. In March 2012, Applicant disputed the past-due amounts being reported for 
the Alpha and Beta mortgages with the credit reporting agencies. He also filed a dispute 
directly with the holder of the Beta second mortgage. The September 2012 credit report 
provided by the Government shows a zero balance due for the Alpha mortgage (¶ 1.b) 
and the primary mortgage on Beta (¶ 1.c). The secondary mortgage on Beta (¶ 1.a) is 
reported as a charged off account with a zero balance. In response to Applicant’s 
dispute, the creditor indicated that the account would be reported as charged off as of 
the date of the trustee sale in October 2010. None of the creditors have contacted 
Applicant to collect the deficiency balances.12 
 
 Since losing the properties, Applicant has focused his efforts on resolving his 
$100,000 in credit card debt. According to the September 2012 credit report provided by 
the Government, Applicant has only three open credit cards with a total balance of 
approximately $40,000. As of the hearing, Applicant had reduced the balance of his 
credit cards to $30,000, paying off a total of $70,000 in credit card debt. Applicant has 
not reduced his credit card debt using settlement; he has committed himself to paying 
every dollar he owes. He applies $2,850 or 25% of his monthly income to credit card 
debt reduction. Following this schedule, Applicant plans to have his credit card debt 
paid in full by 2014.13 
 
 Applicant and his wife earn over $134,300 annually. They rent their home and 
drive older model cars. Their primary goal is to pay off the credit card debt Applicant 
accumulated between 2005 and 2010.  Applicant lives within his means and has not 
opened any new consumer credit accounts. He has no plans to purchase real estate 
until he pays off his credit card debt and is able to accumulate a sizeable down 
payment. Aside from the negative information associated with the three properties, 
Applicant has a positive credit history and a strong credit score.14  
                            
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
12 Tr. 72-78, 97-101, 118-119; GE 2-7; AE A-D. 
 
13 Tr. 79-80, 120-122; GE 8; AE A. 
 
14 Tr. 45, 80-81; AE L.  
 
6 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”15 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to three creditors totaling 
approximately $61,000 for the past-due balances on the primary and second mortgage 
on the Beta property (¶¶ 1.c and 1.a, respectively) and the Alpha mortgage (¶1.b). 
Applicant admits that he strategically defaulted on the mortgages to avail himself of the 
protection offered under State 1’s anti-deficiency law. Applicant’s admission is sufficient 
evidence of his unwillingness to repay his debts and his history, albeit a brief one, of not 
paying his debts. 16 Applicant’s decision to purchase three properties between 2005 and 
2007 and subsequently default on the mortgages also impugns his judgment and overall 
security worthiness. 
 
 However, the record contains evidence that mitigates these concerns. Citing 
state law, Applicant denies that he is legally responsible for the deficiency balances 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant argues that State 1’s anti-deficiency statute and the 
interpretation of the statue by State 1’s Supreme Court provides a reasonable basis for 
him to dispute the legitimacy of the debts alleged in the SOR.17 The Government did not 
offer a position on the applicability or operation of the statute. While resolving issues of 
state law is not ideal in the context of security clearance cases, in cases such as this 
one where the statutory language is clear on its face, and the case law interpreting the 
statute is also clear, the speculation or conjecture regarding the applicability of the 
statute is absent. 
 
 Applicant owned three properties, each being a single family home sitting on less 
than two and a half acres that were sold under a trustee’s power of sale. Each property 
was sold at a price less than the amount owed on the loan. Under the plain language of 
the statute, Applicant’s creditors cannot recover the deficiency balances on the 
properties from him. Although the statute is quiet on whether or not the protection 
applies to second mortgages and refinanced mortgages, State 1’s highest court 
addressed both issues, holding that the anti-deficiency protection applies. Accordingly, 
Applicant is not responsible for the debts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. The 
record supports a finding that the mortgage lenders have acquiesced to the statute. The 
mortgagor for the Alpha property issued a 1099-C on the remaining balance of the loan 
and the creditor is reporting a zero balance to the credit reporting agencies.18 Although 
the primary and secondary mortgage holders on the Beta property (¶¶ 1.a and 1.c) have 
not issued 1099-Cs to Applicant, his most recent credit report shows that the primary 
                                                          
15  AG ¶ 18. 
 
16 AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c). 
 
17 AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
18 Because the Alpha mortgager cancelled the entire deficiency balance on the refinanced loan obligation, 
any question of whether the withdrawn equity was covered under the statute is moot.  
 
 
8 
 
mortgage holder reports a zero balance on the account and the holder of Beta’s second 
mortgage reports the debt as charged off19 as of the date of the trustee sale of the 
property. Furthermore, none of the creditors have attempted to collect the deficiency 
balances from Applicant. 
 
 A finding that the SOR debts are legally uncollectible does not end the inquiry 
into Applicant’s security worthiness; the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner must 
also be examined.20 Because of his lack of experience as a real estate investor, 
Applicant underestimated the time and money required to maintain the three properties. 
However, this does not mean that Applicant’s strategy, while ambitious, was reckless, 
irresponsible, or indicative of impaired judgment that negatively reflects on his security 
worthiness. Before entering the real estate arena as investor, Applicant conducted 
reasonable due diligence. He also had capital. At the time of his investment, Applicant 
believed that his $70,000 in savings would be sufficient to help him enter the market 
and provide enough of a cushion, allowing help him to manage the properties 
comfortably. He also built a time-safety net into his plan; giving himself at least a year 
before he was responsible for managing all three properties. Applicant also believed 
that given the strength of the market, his plan had an exit strategy – he could sell the 
properties if circumstances required him to do so.  
 
 Applicant attempts to execute the fail-safes in his business plan were thwarted by 
events beyond his control: including the arrest of a serial killer on the same street as the 
Alpha property and the unanticipated and unprecedented downturns in the real estate 
market.21 He acted responsibly in response to his financial difficulties by exhausting all 
of his available resources and options, and by seeking professional advice.22 Only as a 
last resort did Applicant take advantage of State 1’s anti-deficiency statute. Given his 
dire financial situation, Applicant’s decision was a reasonable one. He could not 
continue to pay the mortgages and expenses on the properties, his credit card debt, and 
his living expenses. To do so would have guaranteed financial ruin. Applicant made the 
best choice available in a difficult situation.23 Availing himself of the protection offered 
under the anti-deficiency statute allowed Applicant to address his other financial issue, 
namely his $100,000 in credit card debt. He has reduced his credit card debt by 
                                                          
19 The term charge off means a declaration by a creditor “[t]o treat (an account receivable) as a loss or 
expense because payment is unlikely; to treat as a bad debt.” Black’s Law Dictionary 266 (Bryan A. 
Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
20See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
  
21 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
22 AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
23  See ISCR Case No. Case No. 07-06482. 
 
 
9 
 
$70,000 in almost three years. Accordingly, Applicant has demonstrated a meaningful 
track record of debt reduction.24  
 
I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant exposed 
himself to the risk of starting a business. Despite Applicant’s best laid plans and 
intentions, the business failed. He was overly optimistic about his timeline and his 
abilities and undercapitalized when faced with unexpected changes in the real estate 
market. The purpose of a security clearance case is not to assign guilt or blame and 
then punish or sanction a person for their past actions. Likewise a security clearance 
case is not aimed at collecting debts. Rather the purpose is to make “an examination of 
a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
personal is an acceptable security risk.”25 Applicant confronted his financial problems 
directly and when his financial issues became acute he reported them to his FSO. In 
doing so, he raised awareness to a potential area of vulnerability. Applicant has acted in 
a way to eliminate his business-related financial issues as a source of exploitation. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
24  See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (the concept of a meaningful track record of 
repayment must include evidence of actual debt reduction through the payment of debt. This finding does 
not require that the SOR debts be resolved first.    
 
25 AG ¶ 2(a). 
