 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08903 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In an undated letter Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On January 31, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on February 17, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
provided additional information. Department Counsel had no objection and the 
documents are included in the record. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He married in 1979 and divorced in 1996. He remarried 
in 1996. He has four adult children and one adult stepchild. Applicant served in the U.S. 
Navy from 1978 to 1988 and received an honorable discharge. He has been employed 
since 2009 by a federal contractor. 
 
 Applicant has $70,862 in delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. They all relate to 
unpaid medical expenses. He attributed the debts to his heart attack in 2006 and having 
no medical insurance. He indicated that at the same time his wife was diagnosed with 
Crohn’s disease.  
 
Applicant was unemployed from December 2008 to December 2009. He received 
unemployment benefits during this period and was supported by his spouse. He 
explained that until his current employment, he worked for several employers that 
“either failed or could not maintain business volume which caused me to deal with 
layoffs and unemployment.” Since being employed, Applicant indicated he has been 
able to pay off smaller and more recent debts. He anticipated a substantial promotion in 
January 2013, which would allow him to pay off additional debts. He did not provide 
further information documenting whether he received the promotion. Applicant indicated 
he is currently meeting his monthly obligations. He provided a personal financial 
statement on August 31, 2012, that shows a $21 remainder after deducting his 
expenses from his income, but it does not include payment to any of the creditors 
alleged in the SOR.1 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a document verifying that on 
January 23, 2013, he paid the full amount of $960.75 owed for the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.d. He also provided a letter with a settlement offer to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($4,749). The creditor agreed to settle the debt for $2,374.50 with two installments of 
$1,187. The first installment was to be made on February 27, 2013, and the second on 
March 27, 2013. Applicant made an annotation on the letter noting that he made the first 
payment, but did not provide documentary proof of the payment.2 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5. 
 
2 Record. 
 
3 
 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment entered against Applicant in May 2007. The 
amount of the judgment is $39,614, plus fees in the amount of $9,997. The law firm that 
is handling the judgment verified an outstanding balance of $61,934. It received one 
payment of $50 in June 2008. At some point, Applicant offered to pay $20 or $25 a 
month on the debt, but the creditor refused. This debt was incurred by Applicant for 
medical services for his 2006 heart attack and his wife’s condition, which were not 
covered by medical insurance. On April 4, 2011, Applicant provided a statement to an 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. In the statement he indicated he 
planned to begin to make payments on this debt within seven years.3  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a judgment entered against Applicant in approximately 
April 2007 in the original amount of $2,466.25. The creditor verified the current 
outstanding balance as $3,218.15. It received one payment of $50 in June 2008. At 
some point, Applicant offered to pay $25 a month on the debt, but the creditor refused. 
The debt was incurred by Applicant for medical services for his 2006 heart attack and 
his wife’s condition, which were not covered by insurance. In his April 4, 2011 statement 
to the OPM investigator, Applicant indicated he would begin making payments on this 
debt within one year and have the debt satisfied within two years. The debt remains 
unpaid.4 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that a lawyer advised him to “walk 
away” from his home and declare bankruptcy, but he chose not to follow this advice.5 In 
his statement to the OPM investigator, Applicant indicated he had some type of financial 
counseling, but failed to provide specific information as to when and the type.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
3 Item 6. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that have been unpaid and unresolved since 
2006. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has one delinquent debt and two judgments that remain unpaid. He 
has a small amount of money remaining at the end of the month after he pays his 
expenses. He indicated he expected a promotion, but failed to provide any proof that he 
received a pay raise and is addressing his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply 
because Applicant’s debts are ongoing and not resolved. I cannot find his financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant suffered a heart attack and his wife was diagnosed with a disease in 
2006. They did not have medical insurance at the time. Applicant also experienced 
periods of unemployment that prevented him from resolving his medical bills. These 
were conditions that were beyond his control. In order for the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has 
been employed since 2009. He paid one debt after receiving the SOR. He negotiated a 
settlement on another debt after receiving the SOR, but failed to provide proof he has 
made the first payment. The other judgments remain unresolved. Applicant did not 
 
6 
 
 
provide evidence of what actions he has taken to address the delinquent debts after he 
obtained employment. There is insufficient evidence that Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant did not submit evidence of his current efforts to resolve his remaining 
debts or when he last contacted the creditors. Based on his current budget, it does not 
appear that he has sufficient funds to address or manage the debts. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that there are clear indications that his financial issues are being 
resolved or are under control. There is marginal evidence that he had some financial 
counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant’s good-faith effort to pay one debt 
warrants the application of AG ¶ 20 (d) to that debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He accumulated delinquent medical debts that he was 
unable to pay because he did not have medical insurance and was unemployed for a 
period of time. He has been employed since 2009, but did not take any action to resolve 
the debts until after he received the SOR. He has resolved only one debt. He has a 
settlement agreement with another creditor, but did not provide supporting documents 
to confirm he is paying the debt. His promise to pay the large judgment against him in 
seven years does not show a firm or realistic commitment to address this debt. His 
personal financial statement indicates he has minimal resources to pay his delinquent 
debts, or a plan to address them. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
 
7 
 
 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
