 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08514 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate 14 delinquent debts listed on his statement of reasons 
(SOR), totaling about $17,000. He could have made greater progress resolving his 
delinquent SOR debts. The only payments to SOR creditors occurred though 
garnishment of his pay. He intentionally failed to accurately list his delinquent debts, 
judgments, charged-off debts, and debts in collection on his March 28, 2011 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance 
application (SF-86). Criminal conduct concerns are mitigated; however, financial 
considerations and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2011, Applicant submitted his SF-86. (GE 1) On September 19, 
2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations), J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct).1 (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On November 2, 2012, DOD received Applicant’s undated response to the SOR. 
(HE 3) On January 17, 2013, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed 
on Applicant’s case. On January 24, 2013, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. 
Applicant’s hearing was scheduled for February 14, 2013; however, at Applicant’s 
request the hearing was delayed until February 28, 2013. On February 6, 2013, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for February 28, 2012. (HE 1) Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled using video teleconference.  
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits, and Applicant did not offer any exhibits. 
(GE 1-6) (Tr. 22-23) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-6. (Tr. 23) 
Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR. 
(HE 1-3) On March 7, 2013, I received the transcript. Applicant said at his hearing that 
he wanted to submit letters of recommendation, proof of payments on his student loan, 
and proof that on February 25, 2013, he paid an attorney $500 to file his bankruptcy 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. (Tr. 29-34, 72)2 The student loan payments 
are being involuntarily garnished, and he said he wanted to provide a pay stub showing 
$96 payments since November 2012 to address a debt of about $11,000. (Tr. 29-31) I 
told Applicant I would hold the record open until March 4, 2013, to permit him to submit 
documentation. (Tr. 87-88) On March 15, 2013, Department Counsel informed me that 
Applicant did not provide additional evidence, and I closed the record that same day. 
(HE 4) 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted responsibility for the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.e-1.i, 1.k, 1.m-1.o, 1.q, 1.r, 2.d, 3.a, and 3.b. (HE 3) He either denied the other 
SOR allegations or did not address them. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a large defense contractor, who is an 
assembly mechanic. (Tr. 6; GE 1) He has been working for his employer continuously 
                                            
1Applicant did not object to Department Counsel’s motion to amend the values in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 
1.q to $79 and $183 respectively. (Tr. 23-25) I approved Department Counsel’s amendment and changed 
and initialed the changes in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. (Tr. 23-25) 
 
2Applicant has not met with his bankruptcy attorney; however, he planned to pay the remainder of 
$700 fee to the bankruptcy attorney the week after his hearing. (Tr. 34-35) 
 
3Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for 30 months. (Tr. 9) He married in 2007, and he was divorced in September 2012. (Tr. 
7, 58) His children are ages eight years, three years, and six months. (Tr. 7) There are 
three different mothers for the three children. (Tr. 58) He pays $724 monthly in court-
ordered child support for his three-year-old child. (Tr. 59) He pays $200 monthly in 
court-ordered child support for his eight-year-old child. (Tr. 59-60) He lives with the 
mother of his six-month-old child. (Tr. 60) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2000, and he earned an associate’s 
degree in business administration in 2004. (Tr. 8) He has never served in the military. 
(Tr. 8) He has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 9) 
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 17 delinquent debts, totaling about $34,057. They include a 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a for $2,200, which was filed in September 2011 for an apartment 
lease and a judgment in SOR ¶ 1.l for $671, which was filed in January 2005, as well as 
various charged off and collection accounts. The debts range in size from an $82 
medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b to a state garnishment for $12,170 in SOR ¶ 1.k.  
 
Applicant denied knowledge of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c (Tr. 40) He said the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.d was a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 41) The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.d pertain to property companies and are of similar magnitude, and his contention 
that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d are duplications is accepted. 
 
The garnishment in SOR ¶ 1.k went into effect in August 2011; it is now $400 per 
month; the balance owed is about $8,000; and it resulted from Applicant’s receipt of 
unemployment benefits while working part time in 2008-2009. (Tr. 42-43, 67-68; GE 6 at 
I7) His student loan is also being garnished. (Tr. 42) Applicant was unemployed for 
about one year, and his unemployment ended in March 2009. (Tr. 44, 67, 67-68) 
Applicant successfully completed his probation, and restitution (repayment of the bad 
check in SOR ¶ 1.r) is normally part of the sentence. 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (Tr. 39-40), 
and 1.e to 1.q (Tr. 41-46). He did not make any payments to the SOR creditors for “the 
last few years” because he planned to resolve them utilizing Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code. (Tr. 41-46, 66-67) Applicant will receive financial counseling as part 
of the bankruptcy process. This should improve his ability to budget and help him avoid 
future delinquent debt.    
 
Non-SOR Allegations  
  
Department Counsel asked, “Are you current on your state and federal taxes?” 
Applicant responded, “Yes. I don’t owe anything on my income taxes.” (Tr. 65) Applicant 
disclosed that he did not file his state and federal tax returns last year. (Tr. 69-70) He 
explained his answer about not owing anything on his taxes as follows: 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
As of this point, I don’t owe anything. When I do file, within the next week 
or two, when I do file my tax, then I may owe something, but due to the 
dependents that I have whatever I owe that should take care of it. But at 
this moment, I don’t owe anything until I file. That’s why I answered I didn’t 
owe anything. (Tr. 74) 
 
Later, he clarified that that he was unsure when he filed his most recent state and 
federal tax returns because, “My mom files my taxes. I’ll have to get all those for the 
record.” (Tr. 75-76) He was unsure if any tax returns had been filed on his behalf in the 
last five years. (Tr. 76) He admitted that he knew he had not filed his tax returns in the 
last five years. (Tr. 77)  
 
Applicant admitted that he falsely indicated in response to Question 26c of his 
March 28, 2011 SF-86 that he had filed his federal and state tax returns when required 
by law. (Tr. 77; GE 1) Applicant objected to the question because he was unsure about 
when he last filed a tax return. (Tr. 77) He returned to his explanation that he believed 
his mother filed his tax returns, or perhaps his tax returns were not filed. (Tr. 78-79) He 
suggested that he may not have read the question about filing tax returns correctly. (Tr. 
79) 
  
The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to file tax returns for years 2008 to 
2011, and that Applicant falsely answered Question 26c of his March 28, 2011 SF-86 
when he said he filed his federal and state tax returns as required by law. At the close of 
the evidence, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR. (Tr. 80-81) Applicant 
objected to the amendment and requested 15 days of notice before continuation of the 
hearing. (Tr. 81-82) I denied Department Counsel’s motion.4 (Tr. 82)  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 On November 22, 2004, Applicant was arrested for theft, and on November 23, 
2004, he was arrested for third degree domestic assault. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b) 
Applicant was in an argument with his daughter’s mother; she called the police; and he 
was arrested. (Tr. 50) He was not convicted of either offense. (Tr. 48) 
 
                                            
4In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five 
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have not considered the non-SOR misconduct because it is unclear whether his tax 
returns have been filed during the previous five years. Prior to approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information, he should be required to prove he filed and paid his income taxes. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In November 2007, Applicant was arrested for passing a bad check for $500 or 
more. In 2009, he received a misdemeanor conviction and two years of probation, which 
ended in April 2011. (SOR ¶¶ 1.r and 2.c; Tr. 50) Applicant denied the allegation in SOR 
¶ 2.d, that he was arrested in 2008 for writing a bad check and domestic assault. (Tr. 
52-54) In 2008, the police brought him to the police station for the bad-check offense 
and questioned him about a domestic violence allegation. (Tr. 52-54) Applicant’s most 
recent criminal arrest was for writing a bad check in November 2007. (Tr. 52) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant did not fully disclose his arrest record in 
response to Section 22 of his March 28, 2011 SF-86, which asked whether in the last 
seven years, he had any arrests and had he ever been charged with a felony offense. 
Applicant responded, “Yes” to this question, and he disclosed an arrest in April 2009 for 
passing a bad check for less than $500. (Tr. 52-53; GE 1) He said the resulting action 
taken was “charged with a misdemeanor and 2 year probation.” (Tr. 52-53; GE 1) 
Applicant thought his 2004 bad-check offense was more than seven years previously. 
(Tr. 53)    
 
SOR ¶ 3.b alleges that Applicant did not fully disclose his financial problems in 
response to Section 26 of his March 28, 2011 SF-86, which asked about financial 
matters in the last seven years, including judgments, charged-off debts, and collection 
actions. Section 26 includes two questions: “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent 
on any debt(s)?”; and in the last seven years, “[h]ave you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant responded, “No,” to all financial questions, and he 
did not disclose the delinquent debts discussed in the previous section. He knew he had 
delinquent debts in the last seven years; however, he said he did not list the debts 
because he thought that many of them were beyond the seven-year time range. (Tr. 55-
57) He was also rushing when he completed his SF-86. (Tr. 55)  
 
SOR ¶ 3.c cross alleges the criminal conduct concerns. It indicates they also 
raise a personal conduct concern.   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s group manager and supervisor for the last 12 months stated that 
Applicant takes pride in his work. (Tr. 70) He is a dedicated father. (Tr. 71) He is 
pleasant, trustworthy, has good communication skills, and gets along well with his 
coworkers. (Tr. 71) Applicant said he had another positive character-reference letter; 
however, he did not provide it. (Tr. 72)   
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
  The relevant security concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations), 
J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth in 
the SOR. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his SOR response, and his hearing record. Applicant’s SOR lists 17 
delinquent debts, totaling $34,057. They include two judgments and various charged off 
and collection accounts. One SOR creditor is garnishing his pay. He did not make any 
payments to the SOR creditors for “the last few years” because he planned to resolve 
them utilizing Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts does not warrant full application of any 
mitigating conditions to all SOR debts. The debt is SOR ¶ 1.d is mitigated because it is 
duplicated in SOR ¶ 1.b (judgment for $2,200). The state garnishment for $12,170 in 
SOR ¶ 1.k is mitigated because it has been garnished down to $8,000, and he has an 
established payment plan on this debt.6 He paid the victim of the bad check written in 
2007. Applicant denied knowledge of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $866, and I have 
credited him with contesting the validity of this debt. I conclude SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.k, 
and 1.r are mitigated. Applicant will receive financial counseling as part of the 
bankruptcy process. This should improve his ability to budget and help him avoid future 
delinquent debt. Applicant was unemployed or underemployed for about one year, and 
his unemployment ended in March 2009. Divorce adversely affected his finances. 
Unemployment, underemployment, and divorce are circumstances beyond his control. 
He showed some good faith when he admitted responsibility for most of his SOR debts 
at his hearing.   
 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 09-05700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011) (citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 
(App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009) (stating, “involuntary payment of debts through garnishment is not necessarily 
mitigating”)).   
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant has not taken reasonable actions to resolve most of his SOR debts. He 
has two SOR debts that are less than $100, and five SOR debts that are less than 
$200, and he has not paid any of them. He did not provide documentation proving that 
he maintained contact with his SOR creditors, and he did not provide any 
documentation showing his attempts to negotiate payment plans with his SOR 
creditors.7 The only payments to his SOR creditors were through garnishment of his 
pay. There is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being resolved and is 
under control. He did not establish his financial responsibility. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 30 details the concern arising from criminal conduct as follows: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
  On November 22, 2004, Applicant was arrested for theft, and on November 23, 
2004, he was arrested for third degree domestic assault. He was not convicted of either 
offense. In November 2007, Applicant was arrested for passing a bad check for $500 or 
more. In 2009, he received a misdemeanor conviction and two years of probation, which 
ended in April 2011. Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.d, that he was arrested 
in 2008 for writing a bad check and domestic assault. He said the notations in his record 
about a 2008 arrest were part of his November 2007 bad-check case and not a 
separate offense. In 2008, he was also questioned about a domestic violence 
allegation; however, he was not arrested. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) are established.  
 
  AG ¶ 32 includes four conditions which may be applicable in this case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
  AG ¶ 32(c) applies to the alleged offenses in 2004 and 2008. He was not 
convicted of offenses occurring in those years. Applicant was convicted of writing a bad 
check with a value less than $500 in 2007. He received a misdemeanor-level conviction 
and two years of probation. He successfully completed probation, and his 2007 
conviction is mitigated under AG ¶ 32(d).   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies. The Government produced substantial evidence that 
Applicant intentionally lied when he failed to disclose his financial problems, including 
his judgments, debts in collection, debts currently delinquent more than 90 days, debts 
delinquent more than 180 days in the last seven years, and charged-off accounts on 
Section 26 of his March 28, 2011 SF-86.   
 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 3.a that he failed to list all of his arrests and charges on 
his March 28, 2011 SF-86 is not supported by substantial evidence. He provided the 
gist of his criminal offense in 2007, and he gave the date of his conviction in 2009 for his 
2007 misdemeanor bad-check offense.     
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply. Applicant violated rules when he intentionally failed 
to disclose his financial problems and he wrote a bad check in 2007. This conduct 
adversely affects his personal, professional, and community standing. Further analysis 
concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s intentional failure to 
disclose his financial problems, including his judgments, debts in collection, debts 
currently delinquent more than 90 days, debts delinquent more than 180 days in the last 
seven years, and charged off accounts on Section 26 of his March 28, 2011 SF-86. His 
intentional failure to provide accurate information in a security context raises a serious 
concern that is not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant is a 31-year-old assembly mechanic for a large defense contractor. He has 
been working for his employer continuously for 30 months. Some circumstances beyond 
his control, such as insufficient income, divorce in September 2012, and unemployment 
for about a year in 2008-2009 adversely affected his financial circumstances. I am 
confident that he has the ability to comply with security requirements. He graduated 
from high school in 2000, and he earned an associate’s degree in business 
administration in 2004. He is an intelligent person who knows what he must do to 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
establish his financial responsibility. I credited him with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d, 1.k, and 1.r. There is no evidence of security violations, disloyalty, or that he 
would intentionally violate national security. His supervisor made positive comments 
about his work performance, trustworthiness, and personality.   
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant failed to mitigate 14 SOR delinquent debts, totaling about $17,000. 
He could have made greater progress resolving and documenting resolution of his SOR 
debts. The only payments to SOR creditors occurred though garnishment of his pay. He 
did not provide documentary proof that he made any other payments to any of the SOR 
creditors. Two SOR debts are less than $100 each, and five SOR debts are less than 
$200 each. He is very early in the bankruptcy process, and some bankruptcies 
attempted under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code are not successful in discharging 
nonpriority, unsecured debts. He intentionally failed to accurately list his delinquent 
debts, judgments, charged-off debts, and debts in collection on his March 28, 2011 SF-
86, which is a serious, unmitigated violation of his security responsibilities. His 
deliberate failure to fully and accurately disclose negative financial information on his 
March 28, 2011 SF-86 shows lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 15.  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Criminal conduct concerns are 
mitigated; however, financial considerations and personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l to 1.q:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
