 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08693 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) granted Applicant access 
to classified information. In March 2011, Applicant had an alcohol-related incident that 
raised a security concern. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), DOD issued interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment 
potentially disqualifying information. After reviewing the results of the background 
investigation and Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOD adjudicators could 
not make the affirmative findings required to continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information. On September 20, 2012, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for alcohol consumption under Guideline G and 
criminal conduct under Guideline J. These actions were taken under Executive Order 
 
2 
 
 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2012. He admitted the three 
allegations under Guideline G and the two allegations under Guideline J with 
explanations. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 26, 2012, and the case was assigned 
to another administrative judge on November 29, 2012. DOD issued a Notice of Hearing 
on December 10, 2012, for a hearing on January 10, 2013. The other administrative 
judge was unable to convene the hearing and the case was transferred to me on 
January 7, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 10, 2013. The 
Government offered five exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without 
objections as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and 
offered eight exhibits which I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A through H. I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
January 17, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old engineering technician for a defense contractor. He is 
a high school graduate, and has an associate’s degree. He served 20 years on active 
duty in the Navy from April 1984 until August 2004. He retired as a first class petty 
officer (E-6) with an honorable discharge. He received a Navy Achievement medal, 
good conduct medals, and other citations during his active duty service. Since retiring 
from active duty, Applicant worked on military aircraft for defense contractors. He has 
been employed by his employer for approximately six years. (Tr. 23-27; Gov. Ex. 2, e-
QIP, dated October 22, 2007; Gov. Ex. 4, Response to Interrogatories, dated August 
13, 2012, at 121-122) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was apprehended for driving while intoxicated in 
2007 (SOR 1.b), and 2011 (SOR 1.a), and that he was evaluated for alcohol abuse in 
2011 (SOR 1.c) The driving while intoxicated offenses were cross-alleged as criminal 
conduct under Guideline J (SOR 2.a) .  
 
In an interview with a security investigator in May 2011, Applicant admitted he 
started drinking alcohol in approximately 1976. He usually drank five or six beers on 
Friday or Saturday with his wife and friends. It would take the five or six beers for him to 
be intoxicated. He drank to intoxication every other month at his residence. Applicant 
drank because he enjoyed the taste of beer and it made him relax.  
 
 
3 
 
 
He admitted that in March 2007, he was stopped for traffic violations and 
arrested for driving while under the influence of alcohol. His blood alcohol content (BAC) 
was .09. He pled guilty to driving while impaired receiving probation before judgment. 
He was sentenced to 30 days in jail, suspended, and probation for 12 months.1 His 
driver’s license was restricted permitting him to only drive to work. He completed the 
probation in May 2009. He also attended a six-week alcohol counseling program. (Tr. 
27-28, 39-41; and Gov. Ex. 3, Response to Interrogatories, dated August 13, 2012, at 
2.) 
 
Applicant was stopped by police for speeding and other traffic offenses in March 
2011. He was arrested for driving while intoxicated with a BAC of .08. In May 2011, he 
received a fine, suspended 20-day jail sentence, and probation before judgment of 18 
months. Other offenses were nolle prosequi. Applicant was placed in the Ignition 
Interlock Program for 12 months. Applicant successfully completed the interlock 
program with no program violations. He completed his probation in November 2012. (Tr. 
28-32, 36-39; Gov. Ex. 1, JPAS entry, dated May 12, 2011; Gov. Ex. 5, Case 
Information, dated November 26, 2012; App. Ex. F, letter of completion of Interlock 
Program, undated; App. Ex H, Case Information, dated January 4, 2012) 
 
In April 2011, about three weeks prior to his court trial in May 2011, Applicant 
volunteered for and started attending a 26-week outpatient alcohol counseling and 
treatment program. He was interviewed by a security investigator shortly after he started 
the program. At the interview, he told the investigator that he was complying with all 
aspects of his group counseling and had not received a diagnosis. He had not been 
prescribed any medication for his alcohol consumption. He intended to complete the 
program and all aspects of his counseling and probation. He further stated that he 
planned to only drink alcohol moderately in the future so as not to jeopardize his 
relationship with his wife and his employment. (Gov. Ex. 3, Response to Interrogatories, 
Transcript of Interview, at 3-4) 
 
Applicant testified at the hearing that shortly after starting the alcohol counseling 
program and being interviewed by the security investigator in April 2011, he decided 
that he would stop drinking alcohol. He completed the alcohol treatment program and 
no further treatment was required. It is not clear from the information from the treatment 
program if Applicant was diagnosed for alcohol abuse. Applicant believes he may have 
been diagnosed for alcohol abuse in the 26-week program but he is not sure. However, 
based on Applicant’s answer to the SOR and his testimony, I find that he was 
diagnosed for alcohol abuse. (App. Ex. G, Treatment Summary, undated) He has not 
had a drink of alcohol since making the decision not to drink in May 2011. When he was 
drinking alcohol, his consumption never caused him to be late for work, to need a drink 
the morning after drinking, to drink before noon, to have blackouts, hallucinations, or 
                                                          
1 In the state where Applicant’s driving while intoxicates charge was adjudicated, probation before 
judgment is not considered a conviction. But the defendant can be sentenced to a fine, and any jail 
sentence is suspended. The driving while intoxicated charge cannot later be expunged by the judge. (Md. 
Ann. Crim. Pro Art. 10-105(a)(3)) 
 
4 
 
 
withdrawal symptoms, or lie about his drinking. He never considered himself an 
alcoholic. (Tr. 42-54) 
 
Applicant’s coworkers submitted letters of recommendation. One worker wrote 
that he has worked with Applicant for over five years. Applicant has good character 
traits as well as compassion for others. He has a good work ethic and works for the 
betterment of others. His experience with Applicant is positive. Applicant is always 
honest and selfless. (App. Ex. A, Letter, dated December 27, 2012) Another coworker 
wrote he has worked with Applicant for five years. Applicant is dependable and an asset 
to their organization. Applicant always displays good judgment and a regard for safety 
of all workers. He is highly regarded by his fellow workers. He notes that Applicant has 
expressed remorse for his alcohol use and is taking actions to mend his ways. (App. Ex. 
B, Letter, dated December 28, 2012) A third co-worker wrote that he has known 
Applicant for over seven years. Applicant demonstrates sound judgment, and has 
worked to protect classified information. Applicant has not offered excuses for his 
alcohol-related mistakes and is remorseful. (App. Ex. C, Letter, dated December 28, 
2012) A fourth coworker wrote that he worked with Applicant for over six years. 
Applicant is a tireless hard worker who provides a quality product. Applicant admits he 
exhibited a lack of good judgment leading to his driving while intoxicated arrests. He 
sought help and counseling and is making an effort to reform his life. Applicant is not 
dependent on alcohol, and is committed to following the core values of honor, courage, 
and commitment. (App. Ex. D, Letter, dated December 27, 2012)   
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote that he has known Applicant for over a year. 
Applicant works in a critical area that requires concentration, discipline, attention to 
detail, and ability to work as a team member under pressure. Applicant demonstrates an 
ability to work at a high level on all projects. He is an asset to the organization. He has 
great expertise and is committed and dependable. (App. Ex. D, Letter, dated December 
31, 2012) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)  
 
Applicant was convicted of driving while intoxicated in 2007 and 2011. He has 
been diagnosed by an alcohol counselor for alcohol abuse. Applicant's convictions and 
diagnosis are sufficient to raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent); and AG ¶ 22(e) (evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program). 
 
I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much 
time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
 
6 
 
 
action taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)); and AG ¶ 23 (d) (the 
individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation 
along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program).  
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated in 2007 with a BAC of .09. He 
successfully completed an alcohol-treatment program and 12-month probation. He had 
a second driving while intoxicated arrest in 2011 with a BAC of .08. He volunteered for 
and successfully completed a 26-week outpatient alcohol counseling and treatment 
program. He successfully completed probation after both incidents and successfully 
completed a state program that placed an interlock device on his car after the second 
incident. He has a good support system at home and with friends.  
 
 Applicant established a pattern of abstinence and has shown sufficient evidence 
of action taken to overcome his alcohol consumption problems. Applicant had two 
alcohol-related incidents away from work in four years. He did not have any work-
related incidents or other alcohol-related symptoms, after-effects, or other issues. He 
completed two alcohol counseling programs, completed all court-ordered programs, and 
refrained from drinking alcohol for over 18 months. His work is excellent and well 
regarded. This information shows that a significant period of time has passed without 
evidence of an alcohol-related problem. Applicant demonstrated a change in his 
circumstances and conduct reflecting a change in his life. His total abstinence from 
alcohol consumption indicates that he can control his alcohol consumption impulses, 
and establishes a favorable opinion of his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence 
shows that Applicant has been reformed or rehabilitated, and his history shows that he 
will continue to not consume alcohol to excess. I find that Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns for alcohol consumption and that he will not present a security 
concern based on his alcohol consumption. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct are the 
same. The concerns involve questions of Applicant's reliability, judgment, and 
trustworthiness. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
 
7 
 
 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulation. (AG ¶ 30)  
 
 Applicant had two driving while intoxicated criminal offenses in four years. This 
conduct raises Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses). The criminal conduct mitigating conditions involve 
issues similar to those discussed under alcohol consumption. The issues involve the 
passage of time, the unusual nature of the action causing security concerns, the 
likelihood of recurrence, and whether the actions cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. The Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions 
that apply are AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training, higher education good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement). For the same reasons stated above under alcohol 
consumption, Applicant has mitigated the security concern for criminal conduct. 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 20 years of 
honorable service on active duty in the Navy. I considered that Applicant has worked for 
defense contractors for almost ten years and was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information for many years. I considered that Applicant is a good employee 
and his job performance is excellent. Applicant’s attended and completed alcohol 
counseling and treatment programs after each driving while intoxicated offense. He 
 
8 
 
 
successfully completed court-ordered probation and having an interlock device on his 
car. He has not consumed alcohol in over 18 months. He has a strong support system 
at home and with friends. Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that he 
has been rehabilitated and he ceased his consumption of alcohol. Applicant’s history 
shows that he is reliable and trustworthy and has the ability to protect classified 
information. The record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
