 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08747 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for her employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 4) She was interviewed by a security investigator on March 
17, 2011, and verified the accuracy of the interview summary on August 7, 2012. (Item 
5) On August 31, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant received the SOR on September 21, 2012 (Item 2). Applicant 
answered the SOR on October 16, 2012, admitting 15 and denying 3 of the allegations 
under Guideline F. She elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 
3) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on December 27, 
2012. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on February 8, 
2013, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. She provided additional 
information in response to the FORM on March 2, 2013. The case was assigned to me 
on March 12, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old and has worked for a defense contractor as a 
procurement specialist since August 1999. Applicant served on active duty in the Marine 
Corps as a warrant officer for over 21 years from June 1977 to March 1998. She 
received an honorable discharge when she retired. She has been eligible for access to 
classified information since her Marine Corps service. She has never married. Her 
personal financial statement shows net monthly pay of $5,802, and monthly retired pay 
of $2,253, for a total net monthly income of $8,055. She lists $5,396 in net monthly 
expense, leaving $3,584 in monthly discretionary income. It is noted that over $2,000 of 
the discretionary income goes to a savings account. (Item 6) Applicant considers her 
current financial situation as stable with an annual income of approximately $103,000. 
She lives within her means. (Item 5 at 4)  
 
Credit reports (Item 8, dated June 6, 2012; and Item 9, dated February 16, 2011) 
show the following delinquent debt for Applicant; $30 each on eight medical accounts 
(SOR 1.a, SOR 1.b, SOR 1.c, SOR 1.e, SOR 1.f, SOR 1.g, SOR 1.h, and SOR 1.i); $6 
on a medical account (SOR 1.d); $2,558 in collection on a credit card (SOR 1.j); 
$36,775 in collection on a loan (SOR 1.k); $375 in collection on a phone bill (SOR 1.l); 
$42 in collection to a town for medical services (SOR 1.m); $2,429 in collection for a 
utility company (SOR 1.n); $445 in collection for a mail-order company (SOR 1.o); $448 
in collection for a telephone company debt (SOR 1.p); $2,546 for a state tax lien (SOR 
1.q); and $21,839 in past-due federal taxes (SOR 1.r). Applicant attributes her financial 
problems to a short sale of a house in 2007 and medical expenses in 2008. She 
provided no details of the reasons why these two events caused her to incur delinquent 
debt. The total amount of the delinquent debt is $67,703. Applicant admitted to all debts 
except the debts listed at SOR 1.l, 1.m, and 1.q. The amount of the debts she admitted 
is $64,740.  
 
Applicant told the security investigator that the medical debts were copayments 
for her medical care and the responsibility of her health insurance company, TRICARE. 
She has long-term health issues and is in constant discussions with TRICARE 
concerning payment of her medical expenses. (Item 5 at 3) In response to 
 
3 
 
 
interrogatories, Applicant stated that TRICARE will not make any further payments on 
the debts, and she would now work with the medical provider to pay the $240 in medical 
delinquent debts. (Item 6 at 10) She presented no information to show she contacted 
the medical providers or made payments on the medical debts. 
 
In response to questions from the security investigator, Applicant acknowledged 
the credit card debt at SOR 1.j. The debt started to become delinquent in 2007 when 
she sold her house at a short sale and her medical insurance company was not paying 
her medical bills. (Item 5 at 3) In response to interrogatories, Applicant noted she owed 
$1,000 on this account. She did not believe the amount was correct. She thought the 
creditor would make a settlement offer. She did not present any information concerning 
any contact with the creditor, a settlement offer, or any payments on the debt. (Item 6) 
 
In the interview with the security investigator, Applicant acknowledged the 
signature loan debt at SOR 1.k. She obtained the loan in 2004 to help pay medical and 
other expenses. The debt became delinquent starting in 2008, because of her other 
medical expenses. The creditor contacted her in January 2011 offering to settle the debt 
for about 50% of the amount owed. The creditor would accept monthly payments of 
$250. In response to financial interrogatories, Applicant presented a letter from the 
collection attorney showing a payment made on the debt in July 2012. The debt 
payment is listed on her Personal Financial Statement as a monthly debt payment. In 
response to the FORM, Applicant presented documentation of continued payment of the 
debt. (Item 6 at 4, 10, and 12; Response to FORM, dated March 2, 2012, at Letter, 
dated February 18, 2013) 
 
Applicant believes the telephone debt at SOR 1.l is from her previous telephone 
service. She told the security investigator that she was not aware of the debt or the 
amount due and would contact the telephone service. In her response to interrogatories, 
she stated that she was not sure of the name or location of the collection agency. She 
did not present any information to establish her attempts to contact the service provider 
or pay the debt. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
Applicant told the security investigator that she was not aware of the debt at SOR 
1.m. She believes it may be an outstanding medical debt. If the creditor contacts her, 
she will pay the debt. (Item 5 at 3) In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated she 
had not been contacted by the creditor. She was in the military living in the vicinity of the 
location of the medical service provider when the debt was incurred. The military 
medical system was responsible for her medical care. She does not believe she is 
responsible for the debt. She presented no information on attempts to resolve the debt. 
(Item 6 at 10) 
 
Applicant told the security investigator that the original debt at SOR 1.n was for 
utility service. Applicant said she is not responsible for the debt  because she sold the 
property where the service was provided in June 2006, and the utility company 
continued to bill her for the service. (Item 5 at 4) In response to interrogatories, 
Applicant stated she contacted the collection agent and was told they no longer have 
 
4 
 
 
the account. She contacted the utility company asking for her final bill which she has not 
yet received. She would pay the bill if she still owed the debt. (Item 6 at 10) 
 
Applicant told the security investigator that she had ordered items from the mail 
order company listed as the creditor for the debt at SOR 1.o. She has not ordered from 
them since 2004. (Item 5 at 4) In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated she 
would contact the creditor and work with them on the debt. She did not present any 
additional information on her attempts to resolve this debt. (Item 6 at10) 
 
Applicant told the security investigator that she was not aware of the telephone 
debt at SOR 1.p. She thought the debt was paid when she moved in June 2006. The 
collection agency contacted her in December 2010 but she has not made any payments 
on the debt. (Item 5 at 4) In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated she has 
service with the provider at her present house. The service provider told her there was 
no balance due on the account. They were to conduct a further check. If the debt is 
owed, she will pay it. (Item 6 at 10) 
 
Applicant acknowledged a state tax debt as listed at SOR 1.q when she was 
interviewed by a security investigator on March 17, 2011. When she answered the 
SOR, she denied the debt stating that it was paid. After Applicant sold a mobile home, 
she was not aware that the real estate company had not timely transferred the title to 
the property and she owed property tax to the state. Her tax returns were audited by the 
state because of the mistake resulting in additional taxes. Her wages were garnished 
starting in 2008. (Item 5 at 1-2; Item 7 at 3) In her response to the SOR, Applicant 
presented information to establish that the garnishment was completed in January 
2011, and the tax debt paid in full. (Item 3)  
 
In response to financial interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged a federal tax 
debt of approximately $21,839 (SOR 1.r). She states that she has a payment plan with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for $350 a month. She presented a notice from the 
IRS giving her credit for a $200 payment on June 12, 2012, with a $350 payment due 
on July 28, 2012. (Item 7 at 3) In response to the FORM, Applicant presented a 
payment history for the federal tax payment plan through March 2013. (Response to 
FORM, dated March 2, 2013) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant states that she has paid her military star 
card debt in full. In the past ten years, she paid for her mobile home and three vehicles. 
She has had to pay more for her living expenses and to support her local church. She is 
trying to become a better person and pay her debts. (Response to FORM, dated March 
2, 2013)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified 
 
6 
 
 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant, raises Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The delinquent debts show a history of not meeting financial obligations 
and both an inability and unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). These mitigating conditions do not apply.  
 
 Applicant retired from active duty and has been employed by a defense 
contractor for approximately 14 years. She states that she incurred debt as a result of a 
short sale of her house and medical expenses not covered by medical insurance. She 
did not present any information to establish the details of why she could not pay the 
debts. She has significant monthly pay and a large net remainder. She presented no 
information on her efforts to contact creditors to learn the status of the debts. She has 
sufficient income to pay her past financial obligations. With evidence of delinquent debt 
and no documentation to support responsible management of her finances, it is obvious 
that her financial problems are not under control. She has not presented information to 
show she acted responsibly towards her finances.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate she sought or received 
credit counseling. There is no indication her financial problems are being resolved or 
under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
 
7 
 
 
adherence to duty or obligation. A promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a 
good-faith intention to resolve debts. Applicant has to show a "meaningful track record" 
of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. 
All that is required is a plan to resolve financial problems coupled with significant action 
to implement that plan.  
 
 Applicant has shown a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts on three of her debts. She 
paid a state tax lien, is paying her past due federal taxes according to a payment plan, 
and is paying another debt according to a payment plan. However, Applicant failed to 
establish a meaningful track record to all other debts. Applicant did not present sufficient 
evidence to show payment of the other debts or even reasonable attempt to contact 
creditors. She has sufficient income to pay her debts. Applicant's lack of documented 
action to pay her past debts is significant and disqualifying. Based on the acknowledged 
debts and the failure to establish payment of the debts, Applicant has not acted 
responsibly. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s over 21 
years of active duty service in the Marine Corps and her honorable discharge. I 
considered that she successfully had access to classified information for many years. 
Applicant has not established a meaningful track record of paying most of her 
delinquent debt. She is paying some debts but a significant number are being ignored. 
She has not provided sufficient credible documentary information to show she acted 
reasonably and responsibly to address her delinquent debts and resolve her financial 
 
8 
 
 
problems. She did not provide a credible plan to resolve and pay all of her delinquent 
debts. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of her finances or a 
consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. The lack of responsible 
management of financial obligations indicates she may not be concerned or act 
responsibly in regard to handling of classified information. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She has not established her suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from her financial situation. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:- 1.j:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.r:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
