1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-04593
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
                                      For Applicant: James A. Jacobs, Esquire                                     
                                      
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On July 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to the above-
referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR enumerated security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOD took action under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
On August 3, 2012, Applicant submitted a response in which he admitted 6 of 17
allegations and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on October 12, 2012.
The parties agreed to a November 7, 2012, hearing. A notice setting the hearing for that
date was issued on October 19, 2012. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony, introduced
three witnesses, and offered 16 documents, which were accepted without objection as
exhibits (Exs.) A-P. He was given until November 20, 2012, to submit any additional
materials. The Government offered seven documents, which were accepted into the
record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-7. On November 16, 2012, Applicant
 A duplicate of Ex. Q was also included in the mailing.      1
2
requested that the record be kept open through December 4, 2012. Noting no objection,
the request was granted. On November 19, 2012, Applicant submitted a memorandum
that included documentation related to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, o, 1.p,
and 1.q. Noting no objection, it was accepted into the record as Ex. Q. The transcript of
the proceeding (Tr.) was received on November 27, 2012. On December 7, 2012,
Department Counsel forwarded timely received additional  documents from Applicant. I
received those items on December 12, 2012. Noting no objection, I accepted those
documents into the record as Ex. R through Ex. JJ, and the record was closed.  Based1
on a review of the testimony, official case file, and exhibits, I find Applicant met his
burden of mitigating security concerns related to financial considerations. Clearance is
granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old missile technology assembler who has served in that
capacity with a defense contractor for over two years. He has a high school education
and considerable experience in business. He and his wife have two children. 
For over 20 years, Applicant ran a trucking business. It yielded annual gross
revenues ranging from about $750,000 to the low millions. He managed his business
without lawyers, relying on good faith in his transactions. By the mid-2000s, he
discovered not all of his customers and associates were equally true to their word,
especially during an economic downturn. Some of his business peers faced dire
economic times while others declared bankruptcy. Such incidents adversely affected
Applicant’s business, his income, and his ability to meet his tax obligations. As he
continued to take business losses, he tried to honor his own agreements. Meanwhile,
he relied on an accountant to work on his taxes. The accountant tried to work around
the business downturn and, for one year, used money reserved for payroll taxes. Then
Applicant had a costly dispute with his largest customer that culminated in 2008. That
dispute was over what Applicant believed to be illegal or unethical practices.
Meanwhile, as they argued over their business arrangement, Applicant filed for Chapter
7 bankruptcy as he endeavored to find alternative ways to meet payroll, honor his
obligations, and keep his company going. Under these circumstances, business-related
debts became delinquent (i.e., 1.g, 1.i).
In 2008, Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was dismissed as having
been filed in the wrong form. Applicant continued to work to honor his debts and find
some resolution to his Company’s dilemmas. Meanwhile, his wife was battling a form of
cancer which got progressively worse over the next few years. Throughout this period,
Applicant tried to work with his creditors, federal and state tax authorities, and his
accountant, while providing maximum emotional and financial support for his ailing wife.
The debts at issue in the SOR are represented by the following allegations:
 Exhibit page three indicates a balance of $1,136.68 plus $112.64 interest yielding an approximate balance      2
of $1,149, the amount at issue in this allegation for this account.
 Compare full account numbers on both exhibits to establish that both exhibits reference the same account.      3
 Tr. 57-59.      4
3
1.a – Collection account for $1,882. Account in dispute (Exs. S, V; Tr. 37-39). Applicant
has disputed this debt, which originated in a final cell phone bill several years ago.
Applicant orally told staff at the tele-communication company’s store of his dispute of
the charge, but the issue has yet to be resolved formally. 
1.b – Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax lien entered December 2011 for approximately
$1,677. Being addressed. Although this debt remains unpaid, Applicant has been
actively working with the IRS over this and other tax liens noted below (Tr. 40).
1.c – Internal Revenue Service tax lien entered September 2009 for approximately
4,231. See 1.b.
1.d – Internal Revenue Service tax lien entered June 2009 for approximately $72,308.
See 1.b.
1.e – Internal Revenue Service tax lien entered June 2009 for approximately $56,450.
See 1.b.
1.f – Charged-off credit card with balance of about $10,000. In dispute (Ex. T).
Evidence indicates the debt was previously resolved (Ex. N at 2).
1.g – Past-due credit card in the approximate amount of $475. In repayment. This debt
is now in timely repayment. (Ex. E; Tr. 20). 
1.h – Charged-off credit card with balance of about $1,149. Satisfied. This account was
satisfied by payment of $899.32 (Ex. H).2
1.i – Second charged-off account with the same lender as immediately above in the
amount of approximately $1,426. Balance significantly reduced; payments made. While
this account remains past due, the current balance owed was initially reduced to
$1,247.56 (Ex. F; Tr. 21). In turn, Ex. G shows that the current past-due balance is
currently $778.20, indicating that the total past-due balance on the account ending –
6637 has been reduced by nearly half.3
1.j – Collection account in the amount of $9,143. Unaddressed; scheduled to be
addressed in the future. This vehicle is no longer operable. Applicant hopes to satisfy
this debt. However, as a non-business debt, it is not currently at the top of his list for
debt satisfaction.  4
1.k – Charged-off account with balance of about $1,178. Paid off (Ex. B; Tr. 16-17).
4
1.l – Past-due credit account with the same merchant as the one noted at 1.g in the
approximate amount of $462. In dispute (Ex. U). However, Applicant claims to have
cleared the title on this vehicle prior to sale, thus suggesting the debt was previously
satisfied, as argued by the Applicant. (Tr. 59-61).
1.m – Collection account for the approximate amount of $1,421. Satisfied. Applicant
provided evidence that this debt is no longer outstanding (Ex. A; Tr. 19-20).
1.n – Collection account for the approximate amount of $261. In dispute (Ex. W).
1.o – Failure to file Federal income tax returns as required for tax years 2005-2009.
Returns filed. Applicant denied this allegation at the hearing (Tr. 63). He noted that he
worked with the IRS and, with IRS assistance, filed two years of returns late. (Tr. 64;
Exs. AA-EE; Ex. J). Copies of his filings for tax years 2005-2009 were provided after the
hearing. The filing for 2005 is unsigned, but bears contact and preparation information
for the tax preparer, and is stamped as “client’s copy.” The 2006 copy is an amended
form and is similarly marked. The 2007 form is similarly marked. The 2008 form is
unsigned but stamped on page one as a “copy” and is stamped by the IRS and dated
June 11, 2010. The 2009 form is also unsigned, marked as “copy,” and stamped by the
IRS as received on June 11, 2010. (Exs. AA-EE).   
1.p – Failure to file state income tax returns as required for tax years 2008 and 2009.
Returns filed. Applicant provided signed copies of filings for 2008 and 2009. Both
copies are completed on bar-coded state forms; 2008 reflects $291 owed, while 2009
shows $1,425 is owed. (Exs. FF-GG). No refunds are requested on either form. The
evidence indicates that the filings were made appropriately. Applicant is presently
working with the state to determine the final sum owed, if any (Tr. 64-65). Calculation of
his final debt, if any, has been delayed due to state procedures and cutbacks (Tr. 65).
1.q – September 2008 termination of Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding filed in July
2008. The filing was withdrawn after it was determined by the court to be inappropriate
under this chapter. (Ex. HH).
Applicant is presently living within his means on a significantly reduced income.
The majority of his present income is devoted to satisfying his remaining debts and
caring for his wife, a previous cancer patient whose illness returned in 2010 and which
has since progressed to stage IV cancer. Her essential medical needs are extensive.
They have necessitated considerable travel and expense, which has been paid
primarily by Applicant through his income and COBRA health insurance policy. The
couple receives minimal assistance through Applicant’s workplace’s insurer. Applicant’s
wife receives about $1,089 in disability payments. While money is tight, there is no
indication that Applicant is acquiring any new debts or undertaking new financial
obligations.
Applicant and his wife have two grown children, who live independently.
Applicant inherited his present home, on which he owes a modest mortgage, incurred
around 2005 or 2006 to help save his failing business. The couple has received some
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
5
unsolicited financial and emotional assistance from family and their community. At his
place of employment, Applicant is a valued employee who has the potential of more in-
depth work should he receive a security clearance.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a5
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  6
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 states that decisions shall be “in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for
 Id.      7
 Id.      8
 AG ¶ 18.      9
 Id.      10
6
access to classified/sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”7
Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.8
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  It9
also states that an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant admits that he acquired numerous10
obligations resulting from the economic downturn in the mid-2000s, the failure of his
business, and his wife’s declining health. Such facts are sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns. 
Much of Applicant’s financial distress comes from the economic downturn in the
mid-2000s, and its effect on his trucking business through the mid- to late-2000s.
Although he endeavored to honor his commitments and debts, not all of his associates
and suppliers were able to reciprocate in that capacity, thus hampering his ability to
meet the demands of his customers. Meanwhile, as he struggled to sustain his
business, or at least make good on his financial commitments, his wife faced an
aggressive form of cancer which was medically costly in terms of income and time, as
well as emotional turmoil. Despite his diligent efforts, his company failed and his debts
became delinquent. Then, a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was dismissed for being filed
in the wrong form for addressing Applicant’s business-related debts. Meanwhile,
Applicant worked with both the IRS and his state tax bureau to sort out any tax
liabilities, and he continues to actively work with them to date. At the same time, his
7
wife’s cancer has returned and she is now in stage IV, demanding significant, regular,
and costly medical care. In light of these facts, Financial Consideration Mitigating
Condition AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) applies.
While effectively addressing his financial difficulties has been slow since the mid-
to late-2000s, Applicant has undeniably made progress toward the delinquent debt at
issue. In addition, he has worked with both the federal and state tax bureaus with
regard to his accountant’s failings, past filing issues, and tax debts assumed to be
owed. Further, he has formally disputed questionable account balances alleged as
delinquent on his credit reports. Significantly, he also has satisfied or settled several of
the debts at issue. His approach to the accounts at issue clearly appears to be one of
cautiously verifying the debts alleged, working with his creditors, and making measured
progress toward their satisfaction as best he can under his current financial situation.
Overall, it appears his effective approach is to address his smaller or more manageable
obligations first, while actively working with his larger creditors in a forthright and candid
manner. Such efforts are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual indicated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavior in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the specific facts and circumstances in this case. Applicant is a
mature and direct man who was considerably humbled with the collapse of his
business. He endeavored to hold his business together and honor his obligations
despite a downward national economic trend and the economic distress suffered by his
associates and customers. Meanwhile, he helped his wife of many years battle her first
bout of cancer. When he ultimately resorted to filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy, only to
discover it would not cover the types of business debts mostly included in his filing, he
declined to refile under Chapter 13. Instead, he continued to try to keep his business
afloat and to honor his debts as best he could, including the assumption of a modest
mortgage on an inherited home. Despite his best efforts, he lost his business, but
ultimately found employment at his present job. There, he continues to try to satisfy his
debts and support his wife, whose cancer has returned and progressed.
As he acquired the debt at issue, Applicant behaved responsibly and honorably.
Since that time, he has worked diligently to adopt a viable approach for addressing his
8
delinquent debt. Such efforts are to Applicant’s credit and reflect favorably on him under
the whole-person analysis.
. 
This process does not require that an applicant satisfy all of his debts. Rather, it
demands that an applicant devise a reasonable and workable plan for honoring his
debts, implement that plan, and present evidence that such an effort has been
successfully commenced. Here, Applicant presented sufficient evidence that he has
made notable progress in addressing his debts, even if that progress has thus far been
measured. He has actively worked with both the IRS and his state tax departments.
Throughout his financial difficulty, he has continuously worked to honor his debts and
his good name, despite the heavy financial and emotional burdens facing him at home
with his wife’s failing health. Given his present financial demands, little more can be
expected from Applicant to demonstrate his commitment to honoring his obligations. I
have no serious concerns that Applicant will fail to continue his efforts to address his
debts. In light of these considerations, I find that financial considerations security
concerns have been mitigated. Clearance granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
