 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07806 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations, but 
she failed to mitigate the personal conduct issues. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 16, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued her a set of interrogatories. She responded to the interrogatories on June 
16, 2012.2 On an unspecified date, the DOD issued her another set of interrogatories. 
She responded to the interrogatories on June 16, 2012.3 On September 5, 2012, the 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, under Executive Order 10865, 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated March 16, 2011). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 16, 2012). 
 
3
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 16, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), and it detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 17, 2012. In two separate sworn 
statements, dated October 1, 2012 and October 29, 2012, Applicant responded to the 
SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On December 
27, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The 
case was assigned to me on January 4, 2013. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
January 25, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on February 13, 2013. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) and five 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE E) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 22, 2013. I kept the 
record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that 
opportunity, and she submitted four additional exhibits (AE F through AE I) that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations and personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f., and 
2.a.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since October 
2010, has served as a senior analyst, program management support. She is a retired 
lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Air Force, having served honorably on active duty from 
February 1983 until February 2009.4 She was retired, but unemployed, from February 
2009 until October 2010.5 During her military career, Applicant was awarded the 
Defense Meritorious Service Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal (with three oak leaf 
clusters), the Air Force Commendation Medal, the Air Force Achievement Medal (with 
one oak leaf cluster), the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award (with one oak leaf cluster), 
                                                          
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12, 14; Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated 
January 31, 2009, attached to GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories). 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
the Air Force Organizational Excellence Award (with five oak leaf clusters), the Combat 
Readiness Medal, the National Defense Service Medal (with one service star), the 
Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Air Force Longevity Service Medal (with 
five oak leaf clusters), and the Air Force Training Ribbon.6 She was granted a top secret 
security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in 2001.7  
 
Applicant obtained a master‘s degree in business administration in December 
1986.8 She is also a graduate of the Squadron Officer School, the Air Command and 
Staff College, the Air War College, and the Joint Forces Staff College.9 She was 
married in May 1987, and divorced in May 2000. She has a son born in December 
1989. 
 
Financial Considerations10 
There apparently was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until the time 
she retired from active duty in February 2009. In 2001, while still on active duty, 
Applicant had outstanding credit and purchased her residence. Over the next few years, 
she started investing in a number of investment properties, and eventually owned 12 
such properties.11 With the economy and the local real estate market rapidly 
deteriorating, commencing in 2007, and continuing over the next few years, a 
combination of circumstances caused her financial problems that made it difficult for her 
to remain current on all of her accounts. Tenants were unable to maintain their monthly 
rent payments, some properties became vacant, and others weren’t properly maintained 
by tenants, so Applicant unsuccessfully tried to sell several of those properties.12 Before 
she retired, Applicant was earning sufficient income to continue making the mortgage 
payments on her rental properties.13 With her retirement and lengthy period of 
unemployment (February 2009 until October 2010), she was unable to continue doing 
so, relying solely on her retirement income.14  
                                                          
6
 DD Form 214, supra note 4. 
 
7
 AE A (Letter, dated January 6, 2009). 
 
8
 Tr. at 6; GE 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
9
 DD Form 214, supra note 4. 
 
10
 The evidence pertaining to certain allegations is confusing as the SOR does not specify each property or 
account number, the credit reports do not connect account numbers with specific properties, and Applicant’s 
testimony and statements are sometimes inconsistent and confused. See, for example, Tr. at 30-33. 
 
11
 Applicant’s Answer to SOR, dated October 1, 2012, at 1; Statement, dated June 16, 2012, attached to GE 
3, supra note 3; Tr. at 21, 28. 
 
12
 Statement, supra note 11; Personal Subject Interview, dated March 31, 2011, at 2, attached to GE 2, 
supra note 2, at 2; Tr. at 21-22, 44. 
 
13
 Tr. at 21-22. 
 
14
 Tr. at 22. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant was forced to prioritize her accounts, and continued paying her home 
mortgage, her son’s tuition, and her routine bills.15 She couldn’t sell the investment 
properties in the real estate market at that time, and she felt she would deplete her 
savings by continuing to try to pay those mortgages. Fearing that she would lose the 
rental properties anyway, Applicant made a business decision and decided to surrender 
a number of them in a process called strategic defaults or foreclosures.16 The mortgage 
holders agreed to take title of those properties and forgive any unpaid mortgage loan 
balances.17 She retained five properties, including her residence.18  
The SOR identified six purportedly continuing delinquencies. Of those six 
allegations, four refer to mortgage loans that were foreclosed, and for which Applicant 
was issued Form 1099-A, Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property.19 The first 
property, with a fair market value of $53,569.80, and an outstanding balance of 
$47,072.45, was vacant, and foreclosed upon in 2010 (SOR & 1.c.).20 The second 
property, with a fair market value of $59,150, and an outstanding balance of 
$76,224.43, was vacant, and foreclosed upon in 2010 (SOR & 1.d.).21 The third 
property, with a fair market value of $31,280.98, and an outstanding balance of 
$50,161.78, was vacant, and foreclosed upon in 2010 (SOR & 1.e.).22 The fourth 
property, with a fair market value of $23,001, and an outstanding balance of 
$62,893.97, was vacant, and foreclosed upon in 2010 (SOR & 1.f.).23  
 
There was another property for which Applicant obtained a mortgage of $73,800 
(SOR & 1.b.) that went into default in 2011.24 The mortgage holder foreclosed on the 
                                                          
15
 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 12, at 2; Tr. at 22. 
 
16
 Tr. at 23. 
 
17
 Tr. at 23, 45. 
 
18
 Tr. at 28. 
 
19
 According to the instructions for borrower related to the issuance of the Form 1099-A:  
 
Certain lenders who acquire an interest in property that was security for a loan or who have reason 
to know that such property has been abandoned must provide you with this statement. You may 
have reportable income or loss because of such acquisition or abandonment. Gain or loss from an 
acquisition generally is measured by the difference between your adjusted basis in the property 
and the amount of your debt canceled in exchange for the property, or, if greater, the sale 
proceeds. If you abandoned the property, you may have income from the discharge of 
indebtedness in the amount of the unpaid balance of your canceled debt. 
 
20
 AF F (1099-A, dated November 30, 2010); GE 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit 
Report, dated March 25, 2011), at 8; Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 11, at 1; Tr. at 53. 
 
21
 AF G (1099-A, undated); GE 4, supra note 20, at 5; Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 11, at 1; Tr. at 
53. 
 
22
 AF H (1099-A, dated August 31, 2010); GE 4, supra note 20, at 8; Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 
11, at 1; Tr. at 53-54. 
 
23
 AF I (1099-A, dated July 6, 2010); GE 4, supra note 20, at 8; Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 11, 
at 1; Tr. at 54. 
 
24
 GE 4, supra note 20, at 5; GE 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 9, 2012), at 2; Tr. at 31-33. 
 
5 
                                      
 
loan, but in October 2012, Applicant and the mortgage holder agreed to have the unpaid 
balance of the foreclosed property combined with another property loan that was in 
default, but not yet foreclosed upon, and Applicant would commence repaying the 
combined balances.25 Under the agreement, commencing October 2012, Applicant is to 
make monthly payments of $909 until September 2027.26 She is timely making her 
payments.27 
  
There was another property for which Applicant obtained a mortgage of $48,000 
(SOR & 1.a.) that went into default in 2011.28 This mortgage was the one that was 
combined with the foreclosed property under the agreement. Applicant is timely making 
her payments.29 
 
Applicant currently owns five properties, one of which is owned outright, and is 
managing to make her routine monthly mortgage payments for the remaining 
properties.30 All of her other accounts are current.31 In June 2012, Applicant completed 
a personal financial statement in which she indicated a monthly net income, including 
her military pension, of $9,890.20; monthly expenses of $4,257; two mortgages totaling 
$1,828.65; and a net remainder of $3,804.55, available for discretionary spending or 
savings.32 Her assets include real estate (worth approximately $350,000), bank savings 
(approximately $115,600), stocks and bonds (approximately $20,293), and a Thrift 
Savings Plan (worth approximately $58,371.95).33 
 
 With the exception of informal church seminars on finances, Applicant has never 
received formal financial counseling or debt consolidation counseling.34 She learned 
about real estate from her ex-husband who had some experience with real estate.35 
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
25
 AE D (Pro Tanto Settlement and Release Agreement, dated October 5, 2012); Tr. at 31-33. 
 
26
 AE D, supra note 25, at 1. 
 
27
 AE C (Receipts and cancelled check, various dates); Tr. at 31. 
 
28
 GE 4, supra note 20, at 5; GE 5, supra note 24, at 2; AE D, supra note 25, at 1; Tr. at 31-33. 
 
29
 AE C, supra note 27. 
 
30
 Tr. at 46-49, 57. 
 
31
 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
32
 Personal Financial Statement, undated, attached to GE 3, supra note 3. 
 
33
 Personal Financial Statement, supra note 32; Various account documents, various dates, attached to GE 
3, supra note 3. 
 
34
 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 12, at 2; Tr. at 62-63. 
 
35
 Tr. at 26, 42. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On March 16, 2011, when Applicant completed her SF 86, she responded to 
certain questions pertaining to her financial record. Question 26b. asked if, in the last 
seven years, she had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily 
repossessed or foreclosed, and Applicant answered “no.” Question 26f. asked if, in the 
last seven years, she had defaulted on any type of loan, and Applicant answered “no.” 
She certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her 
knowledge, but the responses to the above two questions were, in fact, false.  
 
 Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify her responses, and explained 
that she had misread the directions, thinking she did not have to list anything that was 
“not currently past due or had been paid or foreclosed on with no balance.”36 She 
added: “I thought, because I had – at that time, I had the foreclosures that were paid 
foreclosures, and I didn’t have any difference to pay back, I didn’t think that was 
considered as a foreclosure where I was paying money.”37 
 
Work Performance and Community Service 
 
 Applicant is active in her community, working closely with her church, as a 
Sunday school teacher, and speaking at different high schools.38 Her employer 
nominated her for national recognition, and in 2012, Applicant was selected and 
recognized by a national professional magazine as a Technology All-Star – one of 200 
women of color so recognized – because she has excelled in technology.39  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”40 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”41   
                                                          
36
 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 12, at 1; Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 11, at 1; Tr. at 23, 
49-51. 
 
37
 Tr. at 49-50. 
 
38
 Tr. at 25. 
 
39
 AE B (Letter from CEO & Publisher, dated June 22, 2012; and Women of Color Magazine, dated Fall 
2012), at 1, 55; Tr. at 25. 
  
40
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
41
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”42 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.43  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”44 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”45 Thus, nothing 
                                                          
42
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
43
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
44
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
45
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Commencing in 2007, Applicant started experiencing some financial 
difficulties, and over the next few years those difficulties increased to the point where 
she was unable to make routine monthly payments for a number of investment property 
mortgages. Her mortgages eventually became delinquent. Fearing that she would lose 
several of the rental properties anyway, Applicant made a business decision and 
decided to surrender a number of them in a process called strategic defaults or 
foreclosures. Five mortgages were foreclosed upon. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
9 
                                      
 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.46  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) both partially apply, and AG ¶ 20(d) applies. The nature, 
frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties between 2007 and 
2011 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
Applicant had extensive military experience and substantial experience in real estate as 
an investor. Although she had no formal financial counseling or debt consolidation 
counseling, she did receive informal financial counseling through church seminars on 
finances. She prioritized her accounts, contacted her creditors, and continued paying 
her home mortgage, her son’s tuition, and her routine bills. Unable to sell the investment 
properties in the deteriorating real estate market, she was concerned that she would 
deplete her savings by continuing to try to pay all of those mortgages. Faced with losing 
the rental properties anyway, Applicant made a business decision and surrendered a 
number of them as strategic defaults or foreclosures. The mortgage holders took title to 
those properties, forgave any unpaid mortgage loan balances, and issued her several 
Forms 1099-A. As to SOR ¶¶ 1.c. through 1.f., Applicant has resolved those accounts. 
While Applicant also lost one additional property to foreclosure, Applicant and the 
mortgage holder agreed to combine the unpaid balance of the mortgage loan with the 
mortgage loan of another property, and Applicant has been paying those two 
mortgages, now combined into one. As to SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., Applicant is in the 
process of resolving those accounts. Applicant’s business-based decisions and 
subsequent actions under the circumstances confronting her do not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.47 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant attributed her financial problems to a variety of 
circumstances that were largely beyond her control. Those circumstances included the 
deteriorating economy and the devastated real estate market; tenants who were unable 
to maintain their monthly rent payments; properties becoming and remaining vacant; the 
deteriorating condition of some properties; her inability to sell the properties in the 
plummeting economy; and her lengthy period of unemployment (February 2009 until 
October 2010). Applicant’s indebtedness was not caused by frivolous or irresponsible 
                                                          
46
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
47
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
spending, and she did not spend beyond her means. Instead, her financial problems 
were largely beyond Applicant’s control. Under the circumstances, Applicant acted 
responsibly by addressing her delinquent accounts rather than avoiding them.48  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
In addition, under AG ¶ 16(b), deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative, may raise 
security concerns.  
 As noted above, Applicant made a business decision and surrendered five 
investment properties with outstanding mortgages in a process called strategic defaults 
or foreclosures. On March 16, 2011, when Applicant completed her SF 86, she 
responded to two questions that asked if, in the last seven years, she had any 
possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed, or if she 
had defaulted on any type of loan. Applicant answered “no” to both questions. She 
certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her 
knowledge, but the responses to the two questions were, in fact, false. Applicant’s 
responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submission was a deliberate 
falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of misunderstanding. She 
explained that she had misread the directions, thinking she did not have to list anything 
                                                          
48
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
that was not currently past due or had been paid or foreclosed on with no balance. She 
contended that because the actions were paid foreclosures, and she did not owe the 
mortgage lender any additional monies, the actions weren’t considered “foreclosures.” 
She denied the false responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material 
facts. I have considered Applicant’s educational background, military career, current 
professional career, and investment activities in analyzing her actions. Applicant is an 
intelligent, talented, and experienced individual, but her explanations, to be accepted, 
require that a substantial degree of unreasonableness be ignored. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s explanation is refuted by the fact that she was already delinquent on one 
loan, which went into default around the time she completed her SF 86, for which she 
still owned the mortgage lender money. That was the loan that was subsequently 
combined with another loan and covered in a settlement and release agreement. If 
Applicant had acknowledged the deliberate nature of her actions and expressed that it 
was foolish on her part to have falsified her responses and concealed the truth, her 
actions might have been considered aberrant behavior out of character for her. 
However, Applicant clings to her explanation that the actions were not foreclosures, and 
that she misunderstood the questions. Her position is unreasonable. AG ¶ 16(a) has 
been established.  
 
During an interview conducted by an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in March 2011, in response to unspecified questions, 
Appellant disclosed her foreclosures. AG ¶ 16(b) has not been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
12 
                                      
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.49       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Her 
educational background, military career, and current professional career, were 
outstanding. Until the real estate market collapsed, her investment activities were 
essentially successful. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating:50 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination. When she was unable to continue making monthly payments for a number 
of investment property mortgages, they became delinquent. Fearing that she would lose 
several of the rental properties anyway, Applicant made a business decision and 
surrendered a number of them as strategic defaults or foreclosures. Five mortgages 
were foreclosed upon, with Applicant having resolved four such accounts when she 
received the Forms 1099-A. She is currently in the process of resolving the fifth 
foreclosed property as well as one property that was delinquent. Applicant’s strategic 
                                                          
49
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
50
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
13 
                                      
 
foreclosures are legally permissible, and have resulted in her financial issues either 
being resolved or in the process of being resolved.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial, 
for this is more than simply a case with financial issues. When Applicant completed her 
SF 86, she responded to two questions and certified that the responses were “true, 
complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge, but the responses to the two 
questions were, in fact, false. She denied the responses were deliberate or an attempt 
to falsify the material facts. However, Applicant has an outstanding educational 
background, military career, and current professional career, and her investment 
activities were extensive. She is an intelligent, talented, and experienced individual, but 
her explanations, to be accepted, require that a substantial degree of unreasonableness 
be ignored. Accordingly, I have concluded that she deliberately falsified her responses 
in an attempt to conceal the truth about her financial problems. Overall, the evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial considerations, but has failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct issues. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
