1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 11-07352
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has a tax
lien, a charged-off account and 17 collection accounts, totaling approximately $13,000,
which are unresolved. She provided false information on her Electronic Questionnaires
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed in September 2010 concerning her illegal
drug usage and her employment history. Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 the DoD issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 31, 2012, detailing security concerns under
Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct.
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
2 
On October 10, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated November 15, 2012. The FORM
contained seven attachments (Items 1 – 7). On November 30, 2012, Applicant received
a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.
Applicant’s response was due on December 30, 2012. No response to the FORM was
received. On February 25, 2013, I was assigned the case.
Findings of Fact
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denies the debt listed in SOR 1.r ($680),
asserted she paid two debts (SOR 1.p, $915 and SOR 1.n, $2,671); and asserts the
debts listed in SOR 1.k ($201) and SOR 1.j ($201) are the same debt. She admitted the
remaining 15 unresolved debts. She admitted, with explanation, that she had provided
false information on her e-QIP related to her employment record (SOR 2.a) and
financial record (SOR 2.c). She admitted falsifying the e-QIP, but asserted she had
forgotten about illegal drug related counseling (SOR 2.b). Her admissions are
incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee who works for a defense contractor. She
served in the U.S. Army from March 2001 through February 2005 separating with a
General discharge under honorable conditions. She receives a monthly disability check
from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for a 60%disability, which is $1,009
monthly. (Item 5, SOR Answer). In May 2009, her eight-year marriage ended in divorce.
(Item 6) Applicant had been seeking a divorce since 2003. She and her husband had
only lived together for one month during their marriage. (Item 5)
Applicant admits the majority of her unresolved debts. She provided no
documentation supporting her claim to have paid the debts listed in SOR 1.p and 1.n,
nor did she provided any documentation that the debts listed in SOR 1.j and 1.k are the
same obligation. In her October 2012 SOR response, she asserts she will use her
income tax refund to address some of her outstanding debts. She asserted, but failed to
document, that she has made arrangements with some of her creditors to settle and pay
her unresolved debt as she claimed.
In 2004, while in the U.S. Army, Applicant tested positive for cocaine. She denies
ever using cocaine, but admits testing positive for it. (SOR Answer) She asserted her
military unit had problems with the urinalysis when an E-7 was caught with urine
samples at his home. (SOR Answer) She stated, if “you research the urinalysis that was
done in 2004 for you will see that I should have been cleared of that test.” (SOR
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006.
 
3 
Answer) She provided no documents supporting this assertion. She stated she “did not
purposely mention [her] urinalysis and [ADAPT2] testing on purpose.” (Item 2)
On Applicant’s 2010 e-QIP, in response to questions posed in Section 26,
Financial Record, she indicated she did not know the requested information and a
“credit report would have to be pulled” to determine the information. (Item 6) She
answered “no” to all questions asked in Section 26. This included answering “no” to
Question 26.d, which asks if she had a lien placed against her property for failing to pay
taxes when in fact the state had entered a tax lien against her in 2010. She said she
was unaware of the tax lien when she completed her e-QIP. (SOR Answer) She
asserted, but failed to document, that the state tax lien had been paid. (Item 5) She also
asserted she was unaware of her delinquent accounts until she reviewed her credit
bureau report (CBR) in September 2010. (Item 5)
In 2006, Applicant was terminated from her job for falling asleep on the job. She
was dealing with depression and the death of her brother. She failed to list her
termination on her e-QIP because she “was ashamed for being fired.” (Item 2)
In 2007, an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audit determined she owed $12,000
in federal income tax for improperly claiming her cousin’s children on her 2004, 2005,
and 2006 income tax returns. (Item 5)
In October 2010, Applicant was interviewed concerning her financial
delinquencies. (Item 5) In June 2012, she answered written interrogatories concerning
her delinquent accounts. She has provided no documents showing payment of any
SOR debts.
In October 2010, at the time of Applicant’s personal subject interview, her annual
income was $50,000 and her monthly expenses were approximately $2,000. (Item 5)
Her monthly net remainder (monthly income less monthly expenses) was approximately
$1,000. (Item 5) When asked during the interview about various delinquent accounts,
she stated she intended to dispute a number of her accounts with the credit bureau and
intended to make payment arrangement on any account she owed. She planned on
having all of her obligations paid within two years. (Item 5)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
                                                          
2 The Army’s Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Treatment (ADAPT) program includes substance
abuse prevention, education, treatment, and urinalysis testing.
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to
financial problems:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
5 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may
behave in other aspects of life.
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations.
Applicant has a history of financial problems. She has one unpaid tax lien, a
charged-off account, and 15 collection accounts, which total approximately $13,000.
The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19.a, “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19.c, “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant has been aware of the security concerns over her unpaid accounts
since her October 2010 interview. At that time, she stated she would be disputing
certain accounts and arranging payments on those accounts she owed. She has
provided no documents establishing payment on any of the accounts or arranging
repayment on her delinquent accounts. She asserts the state tax lien and other debts
were paid, but submitted no documents showing payment.
Applicant established she was divorced in 2009, which is a factor beyond her
control. However, she failed to document how that divorce caused her inability to pay
the SOR debts. She married in 1981 and divorced in 2009. However, during the
marriage, she lived with her husband only one month. This indicates the financial impact
caused by the divorce would be minimal.
It has been more than two years since she was questioned about her delinquent
accounts and even the smallest debt of $88 (SOR 1.g) remains unpaid. Applicant’s
delinquent debts are numerous, ongoing, and remain unpaid. There is insufficient
evidence to conclude her actions happened under unusual circumstances or that they
are unlikely to recur. She disputes certain debts, but has provided no documented proof
to substantiate the basis of her disputes. There is no evidence she has received
financial counseling, nor is there a clear indication that her financial problems are being
resolved. There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. I find none of
the mitigating conditions apply.
6 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 provides a condition that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Applicant’s security clearance application:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
The SOR alleged Applicant intentionally falsified three sections of her September
2010 e-QIP by failing to disclose derogatory information about a job termination, using
cocaine, and her financial delinquencies.
Applicant stated she purposely did not mention her urinalysis or ADAPT testing
when she completed the form. She failed to list her termination because she was
ashamed of being fired. These were intentional, willful actions of Applicant failing to
provide truthful answers. She says she should have been cleared of the 2004 urinalysis,
which was positive for cocaine. She has failed to establish this as true. Mere assertion
without collaborating documents is insufficient for a favorable finding.
The Government has shown Applicant's e-QIP answer concerning her finances
was incorrect, but this does not prove her omission was a deliberate effort to conceal
facts from the Government. In responding to the financial questions she stated she did
not know the requested information and a credit report would be needed to determine
the state of her finances. At the time she completed the e-QIP she was unaware of the
state tax lien. Intent to deceive or mislead the Government does not require direct
evidence and can be inferred from circumstantial evidence, but this is not the case here.
Her answer to the financial questions put the Government on notice that she might have
financial problems and that further investigation into this matter was necessary. As to
her responses to the financial questions only, I find her answers were not a deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification. However, the disqualifying conditions apply to
her responses to the questions concerning her illegal drug use and her employment
record. I find against her as to personal conduct.
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under these circumstances I am not
persuaded Applicant will establish repayment plans and address her delinquent
accounts. She has too much outstanding debt and offered too little proof that she is
satisfying her debt to conclude her debt no longer constitutes a security concern. There
is no evidence that even the smallest of the debts listed in the SOR has been paid. Her
actions in failing to inform the Government of her work termination and positive cocaine
urinalysis on her security clearance application were intentional acts for which there is
no mitigation.
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid. It is whether her financial
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG &
2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations and personal conduct.
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs1.a – 1.s: Against Applicant
8 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
_____________________
CLAUDE R. HEINY II
Administrative Judge
 
