 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08271 
                                                            )                                                                                                                                   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on 
March 15, 2011. On June 8, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 20, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on January 4, 2013. A Notice of 
 
2 
 
 
Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for January 28, 2013, was issued January 10, 2013. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified 
and introduced two exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A and Ex. B and entered in the 
record without objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
February 11, 2013, for two purposes. First, I asked both parties to provide citations to 
DOHA cases that addressed the issue of strategic default. Second, I left the record 
open, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information. 
 
 Applicant timely filed eight evidentiary documents. I marked Applicant’s 
submissions as Ex. C through Ex. J and entered them in the record without objection. 
Department Counsel provided citations as requested. Applicant provided citations as 
requested and also included additional argument and interpretation. Department 
Counsel objected to the additional argument and interpretation provided by Applicant. In 
response, Applicant provided further information. I granted Department Counsel’s 
objection, and I did not consider Applicant’s additional argumentation and interpretation. 
I marked Applicant’s citations, argument, and interpretation as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I 
marked Department Counsel’s citations as HE 2. I marked Department Counsel’s 
objection and Applicant’s response as HE 3. I marked my statement granting 
Department Counsel’s objection as HE 4. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on February 6, 2013. 
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant denied the two allegations and offered additional information.1  
(SOR; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and employed by a government contractor as a 
program manager. He has worked for his present employer for almost seven years. In 
1985, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military, where he served on active duty for 20 
years. For most of his time in military service, Applicant held a security clearance. In 
                                            
1 When SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence 
sufficient to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, 
the Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR 
indeed took place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the 
established facts and events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), (concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case 
No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009). 
 
3 
 
 
2005, he retired as a master sergeant and received an honorable discharge. His last 
security clearance review was in 2005. (Ex. 1; 28-32, 64.) 
 
 During his military service, Applicant earned a meritorious service medal, two 
accommodation medals, three achievement medals, seven good conduct medals, a 
Global War on Terrorism Service medal, and a Military Outstanding Volunteer Service 
medal. He also attended night school and earned an associate’s degree and a 
bachelor’s degree. In 1999, he earned a master’s degree in human resources 
development. In 2010, Applicant began studies toward a doctorate in emergency 
management. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 In 1987, Applicant married; his wife died in 2001. On his e-QIP, Applicant did not 
report that he had any children. Since 2006, Applicant has cohabited with a domestic 
partner. Applicant’s partner was born in Lebanon. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
and acquired a new legal name. In a March 2011 interview with an authorized 
investigator, Applicant could not recall when his partner became a U.S. citizen. (Ex. 1; 
Ex. 2.)  
 
 In April 2005, Applicant purchased a condominium apartment in a new 
development for $417,000. He purchased the unit from the original owner of the 
property. At the time he purchased, he noted that similar units were being offered by the 
real estate developer for $469,000. Applicant, who had made real estate purchases in 
the past, believed he was making a good investment because he paid approximately 
$50,000 less for his unit than the developer was asking for similar units. He stated: “I 
thought I was walking into something with $50,000 equity already.” (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 33, 
64-65.) 
 
 Applicant financed the property with two mortgage loans. The primary mortgage 
loan was for $332,000 and the secondary mortgage loan was for $62,000. Both 
mortgages were held by the same commercial lender. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 32-34.) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly payments on the primary mortgage and the secondary 
mortgage totaled approximately $3,300. Insurance and condominium fees were 
included in the $3,300 figure. (Tr. 48-50.) 
 
 After purchasing the condominium, Applicant’s income continued to rise. He 
reported that his net after-tax income in 2009 was about $95,000; in 2010, it was 
approximately $105,000; and in 2011, it was between $130,000 and $140,000. (Tr. 42-
43.) 
 
 In May 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a 
personal financial statement. He reported that his net monthly income from his salary as 
a government contractor was $9,664. In addition, he received $1,931 each month in 
military retirement pay. Applicant’s total net monthly income was $11,595. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant reported the following monthly expenses: rent, $1,700; groceries, $300; 
clothing, $100; utilities, $100; car expenses, $500; and miscellaneous (entertainment, 
transportation, etc.), $300. Applicant’s reported monthly expenses total $3,000 (Ex. 2.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant reported that he has a $4,531 automobile debt and is 
obligated to pay $221 each month on that debt. Instead of the $221 payment, however, 
Applicant pays $500 each month on his automobile debt. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s net remainder each month is $8,095. Additionally, he listed the 
following financial assets: bank savings, $39,060; stocks and bonds (retirement and 
non-retirement), $288,178; and automobile, $22,000. Applicant’s current financial 
assets total $349,238. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant’s primary mortgage account is in 
foreclosure and he owes the mortgage lender approximately $332,000. The SOR 
alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owes about $61,799 on a charged-off debt arising from 
his second mortgage, a home equity account.   
 
 Applicant stated that, beginning in 2007, the financial downturn in the housing 
market caused his condominium apartment to lose value. In 2007, he reported, the 
property value had depreciated from its initial fair market value to $316,000. In 2008, the 
value of the property depreciated to $270,000. In 2009, the property value depreciated 
to $187,000, and in 2010, the property had depreciated to $181,000. (Ex. H; Ex. I; Ex. J; 
Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 Applicant decided he did not want to keep the property, even though paying the 
two monthly mortgages was not a financial hardship for him. He also elected not to put 
the property on the market and offer it for sale in a traditional manner, a choice which 
would have made him liable for paying the difference between the price for which he 
was able to sell the property and the amount he still owed on the two mortgages. He 
stated that he wanted to use his income for other purposes and, in uncertain times, to 
save for his retirement. He consulted with his tax attorney and his real estate broker. 
They advised him that a strategic default “was a smarter financial play” for protecting his 
financial situation and saving for his retirement.2  (Ex. E; Ex. F; Tr. 55-58.) 
 
 Applicant learned that lenders will not consider an application for a short sale3 of 
a property until the borrower is 90 days in arrears in making payments on a mortgage. 
In December 2010, he stopped making payments on his second mortgage. After about 
six months, he also stopped making payments on his primary mortgage. His mortgage 
lender rejected, without explanation, three offers Applicant put forward from potential 
                                            
2 A strategic default occurs when a borrower stops paying on a debt or contractual obligation even though 
he or she has the financial means to make the agreed-upon payments.  
 
3 A short sale occurs when the proceeds from the sale of a property are less than the combined liens 
against the property, the borrower cannot repay the full amounts of the liens, and the lender agrees to 
release the liens and accept less than the amounts owed on the debt. 
 
5 
 
 
short-sale purchasers of his property. The lender sold the property at foreclosure in April 
2011 for $144,900, and, for tax year 2011, it provided Applicant with an Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-A reflecting the fair market value of the property and 
Applicant’s financial obligation of $332,000 on the primary mortgage. As of the date of 
the SOR, the debt remained unpaid. (Ex. 3; Ex. 6; Tr. 36-37, 51-57.)  
 
 Applicant also provided a copy of IRS Form 1099-A for tax year 2011 showing a 
principal balance outstanding on the second mortgage of $61,799.41. In June 2012, 
Applicant’s mortgage lender agreed to a settlement of the amount owed under his 
second mortgage. The settlement agreement specified that Applicant would pay the 
lender $6,328.04, which was ten percent of the payoff balance of the second mortgage 
of $63,208.43. Applicant provided documentary evidence corroborating payment of the 
settlement amount. He also provided a copy of a 2012 IRS Form 1099-C showing that a 
debt of $55,471.37 had been discharged on the second mortgage, was imputed income 
to Applicant, and was therefore subject to federal income tax in 2012. (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. 
C; Ex. D.) 
 
 Applicant’s former military colleague, who is now a security professional, 
provided a letter of character reference for Applicant. He stated that Applicant had 
informed him of his financial situation and his decision to intentionally default on his two 
mortgage loans. The individual stated that he explained to Applicant how this decision 
might impact his security clearance. He also stated that he “was hard pressed to give 
[Applicant] a viable alternative.” (Ex. G.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
6 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. 
 
 In 2005, Applicant voluntarily purchased a condominium residence and 
contracted to satisfy a first mortgage of $322,000 and a second mortgage, a home 
equity account, of approximately $62,000. At the time of purchase, Applicant believed 
he had the better part of a bargain because he was able to purchase his property from a 
private seller for $50,000 less than a real estate developer was asking for similar 
properties in the same development. When the property lost significant value in a 
housing market decline that began in about 2007, Applicant decided in 2010 to stop 
paying both mortgages, even though he had sufficient income to do so, in order to 
qualify for a short sale. This record evidence is sufficient to raise the potentially 
disqualifying conditions found at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies arose in 2010 and 2011 when he elected to 
stop making payments on two mortgage debts on a property he had purchased. He did 
so because he was disappointed with the way in which a financial downturn in the real 
estate market had diminished the value of his property. Applicant had sufficient funds to 
make the monthly payments on the two mortgages as well as a substantial monthly 
remainder. Nevertheless, upon learning that the financial institution holding his two 
debts would not consider approving the property for a short sale until a debtor was 90 
days in arrears, he stopped paying his second mortgage in 2010 in order to meet the 
 
8 
 
 
90-day criterion. Later, for the same reason, he also stopped paying his primary 
mortgage. The financial institution denied Applicant’s three requests to sell his property 
in a short sale. As a consequence, Applicant’s property went into foreclosure, and he 
owed a balance due of $322,000 on his primary mortgage. His home equity account, 
totaling approximately $61,799, was charged off as a delinquent debt. 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquency is fairly recent, and it involves substantial sums 
of money. He was an experienced buyer, and he had purchased and sold other homes 
in the past. He knew what he was doing when he purchased a condominium apartment 
for $417,000 in 2005. His decision to default on his two mortgages, even though he 
could afford to make the monthly payments, casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply to the 
facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 The subsequent decline in the real estate market and the economic downturn in 
2007 were beyond Applicant’s control. These facts suggest that AG ¶ 20(b) might apply 
in mitigation. It is important, however, to recognize that AG ¶ 20(b) has two parts: the 
identification of events beyond an individual’s control that could cause a failure to meet 
financial obligations and an examination of the individual’s subsequent actions to 
assess whether he or she acted responsibly when faced with an uncontrollable event 
that impacted his or her financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances when he elected to 
“walk away” from a contractual obligation he had incurred voluntarily because he was 
disappointed with the outcome of his bargain. At his hearing, Applicant recounted how 
he had acted in his self-interest when he forced his mortgages into default in order to 
invoke a short sale.4 However, in doing so, he set aside his contractual obligations to 
his creditor and failed to act responsibly under the circumstances when confronted with 
the decline in value of his two mortgages. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply to 
the facts of Applicant’s case.        
 
Applicant sought the counsel of his tax attorney and his real estate agent before 
he elected to default on his mortgages. He was advised that a default that would 
generate a short sale was a good business decision. His former military colleague 
discussed with him how his decision might affect his security clearance. The record 
does not reflect that Applicant received financial credit counseling. I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(c) applies only in part. 
 
The record reflects that Applicant entered into an agreement with his creditor to 
settle his delinquent home equity mortgage account in June 2012. The terms of the 
settlement agreement required Applicant to pay the creditor $6,328.04 or ten percent of 
the total debt. The remaining debt was forgiven, and Applicant was responsible for 
paying federal income tax on the forgiven portion.  
 
                                            
4 Applicant did not address his inability to meet the hardship provision of the short sale.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s $322,000 primary mortgage account was subject to foreclosure. He 
received a Form 1099-A from his creditor for the debt in 2011, and the debt remains 
unpaid. 
 
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
Applicant’s attempt to force a short sale by defaulting on his two home mortgage 
debts was not reasonable. By failing to honor his contractual agreement with the 
mortgage lender, Applicant did not adhere to his obligation as a borrower, and he did 
not act in good faith. Moreover, Applicant failed to demonstrate a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of his two mortgage obligations. I conclude that AG ¶ ¶ 20(d) and 
20(e) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole- person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 46 
years. He served honorably in the U.S. military, and he holds a responsible position as 
a government contractor. His monthly net remainder is over $8,000. 
 
Despite an ability to pay his two mortgage debts each month without hardship, 
Applicant elected to default on them when the mortgaged property precipitously 
declined in value. He hoped the defaults would persuade the lender to authorize a short 
sale. He provided documentary evidence supporting his claim that he was told by his 
lawyer and his real estate broker that his strategic default was a good business 
decision. He followed their advice and acted in his self-interest. 
 
However helpful to one’s self-interest a good business decision may be, other 
matters should also be considered when one has been granted a security clearance. 
Applicant also had a good-faith obligation to honor his financial commitments and 
contracts, even, and especially, in difficult circumstances. To seek a short sale, a 
remedy normally reserved for hardship cases, was neither reasonable nor responsible.   
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I 
conclude, after a careful review of the facts of his case, the financial considerations 
adjudicative guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
