 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01862 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 29, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 9, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 7, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 27, 2013. 
 
2 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional evidence. She submitted AE B and C, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 7, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement contemplated by the 
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, paragraph E.3.1.8. Additionally, Department 
counsel indicated she orally notified Applicant on February 6th about the hearing date 
and location, which is more than 15 days from the hearing date.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the debts listed in the SOR. The admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2008 as an administrative specialist. She has a master’s 
degree and believes she is currently underemployed because her current position only 
requires a high school diploma. She is married and has no children. Her husband has 
six children from previous relationships. She believes he is required to pay child support 
for two or three of the children. She has no military experience and has never held a 
security clearance in the past.2  
 
 The SOR alleged three delinquent debts totaling about $41,183. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained in June 2012 and August 2010.3  
 
 Applicant received a master’s degree in December 1986. She used student loans 
to finance her education. The original amount of the loans is not in the record, but when 
they went into collection status in December 2009 they amounted to about $37,000. 
Currently, the balance is about $43,000 on the student loan debt. Applicant testified that 
she was making regular monthly payments through the years on the debt in the amount 
of about $300. When a major hurricane hit the area in 2005, she could not continue the 
payments. Her husband lost his carpentry job and she was temporarily displaced from 
her job. Her husband has never resumed full-time employment. He has only been able 
to work odd jobs here and there. Applicant worked two different jobs before she 
obtained her current job. She testified that she has not made a student loan payment 
since December 2005 or January 2006. She told a defense investigator during an 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 11-12. 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 6, 22; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
interview for her security clearance in September 2010 that she was making biweekly 
payments on the student loans. This information to the investigator was not true. She 
also testified that she has not contacted the student loan creditor to set up a payment 
plan or discuss the possibility of obtaining a deferral of payments.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is the delinquent student loan debt in the amount of 
$41,000. As stated above, there have been no payments since December 2005 or 
January 2006 and no contact with the creditor. This debt is unresolved.5 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account for a delinquent service provider 
debt in the amount of $69. Applicant admitted this debt in her answer, she also admitted 
to having an account with this service provider. She cannot locate information about this 
account. Her contact will the creditor has not been fruitful in resolving this account. This 
debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a collection account for a medical debt in the amount of 
$114. Applicant provided documentary evidence showing this debt was paid in January 
2013. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 Applicant’s budget shows that after expenses she has a monthly disposable 
income of about minus $768. She also stated that she is behind about $1,000 on her 
mortgage. She owes about $800 on last year’s federal tax return. She was paying $100 
towards satisfaction of her tax debt, but stopped about three months ago because she 
was low on funds. All of her other household bills are current. She presented character 
letters from friends, her church minister and an elder. All attest to her work ethic and 
dedication. All recommend her for a security clearance.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 23-25, 27, 29, 38; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 23, 27, 29; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 26-27; GE 4. 
 
7 Tr. at 25; GE 4; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 33-35; GE 3; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has multiple debts that are delinquent. She was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy her obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple. She has paid one debt, but the others, 
particularly the large student loan debt, remain unpaid. Her poor financial record and 
her failure to establish a plan to pay the remaining debts casts doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant was impacted by a hurricane, underemployment, and her husband’s 
loss of job. These are conditions beyond her control; however, in order for this 
mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must also act responsibly. Applicant has not 
made contact with the student loan creditor to explore whatever options she may have. 
Her inaction toward this debt does not amount to responsible behavior in dealing with 
her debts.  AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counseling. The debt that was paid is resolved, 
however, the remaining debts are not resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
apply to the paid debt, but do not apply to the remaining debts since no good-faith effort 
 
6 
 
was made toward paying those debts and her overall financial situation remains 
unresolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s difficulties caused by a hurricane and her character 
evidence. I must also consider that beyond resolving one debt, she has done very little 
to resolve the remaining debts. Additionally, she admitted owing on last year’s federal 
income tax and being behind on her mortgage loan. Her past financial track record 
reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to question her ability to resolve 
her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
