1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-07478
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred over $55,000 in delinquent debts since 2007, when he lost his
last steady employment before starting his current job two years ago. After failing to
negotiate manageable repayment agreements, he filed for and is complying with a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The evidence is sufficient to mitigate resulting security
concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 2, 2011.
On May 11, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 7, 2012 (AR1), and again on July
26, 2012 (AR2), and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 19, 2012. The case was assigned to
me on November 28, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 8, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as
scheduled, on January 23, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4,
which were admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, a Government
exhibit list. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, and testified on his own behalf. I
granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open for submission of additional
evidence until February 7, 2013. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on
February 6, 2013. Applicant timely submitted AE E, which was admitted without
objection, and the record closed as scheduled.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked for two years with an interim security clearance. He is recently separated, after
20 years of marriage, with three teenage children. He is a high school graduate, with no
prior military service. He worked for six years as a project and site manager for a
residential construction company, but quit that job in August 2007 because he was
having to work 80-90 hours per week on salary. He was then unemployed or self-
employed as a homebuilder until September 2009. Due to the bad economy and
housing market, he could not obtain enough work so he went to work for two other
construction companies. By February 2011 the available construction work was
insufficient so he obtained his present full-time position. (GE 1; GE 4; Tr. 39-46.) 
In his responses to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of all of the factual
allegations except SOR ¶ 1.b, for which he submitted proof of payment on April 2, 2012.
(AR1.) Applicant’s admissions, including his statements in response to DOHA
interrogatories (GE 4), are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant admits that he owes the seven remaining delinquent debts, as listed in
the SOR and corroborated by the record credit reports, totaling $55,238. These debts
became delinquent during 2010 and 2011, as a result of their financial hardships,
Applicant and his wife separated around the beginning of 2012. She and their children
still live in their family home. Applicant is temporarily living in a motor home on a friend’s
property, in return for which he performs work for the friend. Applicant and his wife also
still own their former home, which they have rented to a tenant since 2001 for enough to
cover the mortgage and escrow payments. (AR1; AR2; GE2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 54-56,
70.)
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his inability to secure regular full-
time employment for several years after he left his job in August 2007, and the
increased costs of maintaining two households. As of April 2012, he was working to
enter a debt consolidation program and obtain mortgage assistance. Those efforts were
unsuccessful, so he reluctantly consulted a bankruptcy attorney who helped him and his
3
wife to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition on November 20, 2012. (GE 4; AE D; Tr.
37-38.)
Due to some confusion about automatic pay deductions, Applicant missed the
first two payments, but he has made the required weekly $581 payments to the trustee
since December 20, 2012. He made a double payment the week before his hearing to
help catch up, and had a pending modification to increase his weekly payments to $604
to recover the remaining amount. His income is sufficient to make those payments,
which are scheduled to continue until November 2017. (AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 34-35,
53.)
All of the debts listed on the SOR are covered under Applicant’s bankruptcy plan,
including the mortgage loan on their family home. The rental home is not included in the
plan, and he makes payments toward that mortgage loan separately. The plan also
includes several debts that were not alleged on the SOR, and covers a total of $56,424
in unsecured nonpriority claims. Applicant completed both financial counseling courses
required under the bankruptcy code. (AE D; Tr. 52-58, 62-63.)
Applicant submitted a copy of a letter from his manager congratulating him for his
good work performance. He also submitted four good-character letters from two other
supervisors and two former employers commending his outstanding work ethic,
reliability, and dedication. (AE B; AE E.) He was well organized and knowledgeable
about his financial circumstances, and credibly testified to his commitment to complete
resolution of his debts through his bankruptcy plan. 
  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
4
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The record evidence established security concerns under two Guideline F DCs,
as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant’s SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past several years. He
paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in April 2012, but was unable to negotiate a workable
repayment plan for the other seven delinquencies on his own after obtaining his present
5
employment. When the SOR was issued, they remained unresolved, and totaled
$55,238. This evidence raised substantial security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c),
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.
The evidence does not support any other DC under this guideline. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s seven delinquent debts accumulated over the past few years, total
more than $55,000, and continue to date. They arose due to his inability to obtain
enough work in the construction industry during the recent recession, but that situation
followed his decision to voluntarily leave the job that paid him enough to pay all his bills
up until summer 2007. He has since regained full-time employment with enough income
to fund his bankruptcy plan, but his family circumstances and living situation are
unsettled. The evidence establishes partial mitigation under MC 20(a), at best. 
Applicant offered sufficient evidence to support partial mitigation under MC 20(b).
His inability to pay some debts arose largely due to his inability to obtain enough
construction work during an unexpected and severe economic downturn that hit that
industry very hard. He endured several years of unemployment and underemployment
with moderate delinquent debt given his family with three teenagers. Finally, unable to
negotiate terms for resolution of these debts on his own, he entered into a Chapter 13
bankruptcy plan to repay as much of his debt as his circumstances permit under
supervision of a trustee. This demonstrates responsible action under the circumstances.
6
Applicant underwent legal and financial counseling, and established clear
indications that the financial problems are being resolved and are under control for the
future. He provided evidence to establish his good-faith effort to repay his overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve his debts through his Chapter 13 plan. MC 20(c) and
20(d) are therefore applicable. 
Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of the debts alleged in SOR, to which he
admitted or had repaid, and for which the record credit reports provide substantial
evidence. Accordingly, he made no effort to mitigate those allegations under MC 20(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a sincere and
hard-working individual, who suffered economic hardship due to the severe economic
recession since 2008. He is mature and accountable for his choices and actions, and
prioritized his spending of limited resources in a reasonable way. His action toward
resolution of his remaining delinquent indebtedness, through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy
process, demonstrates positive permanent behavioral changes and rehabilitation. The
potential for exploitation or duress is greatly diminished, and the likelihood of recurrence
of financial issues has been minimized. Overall, the record evidence creates no doubt
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
