1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-03721
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 7, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) identified Applicant as owing nine delinquent
debts totaling $23,942. Applicant satisfied one debt voluntarily after his hearing, and five
others were satisfied through involuntary garnishment. He failed to present sufficient
evidence that he is addressing the remaining three debts in a responsible manner or
that he has the discipline to resolve them. His remaining three debts total $17,143, and
constitute over 70% of the  total debt alleged on the SOR. Applicant chose to ignore his
debts from 2006 through early 2013. Eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on October 8, 2010. On September 21, 2012, the Department of Defense issued
an SOR to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
2
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 19, 2012, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2013. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on January 8, 2013, scheduling the hearing for February 5, 2013. The
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through
9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through K,
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record
was left open until February 26, 2013, for the receipt of additional documentation.
Applicant presented two post-hearing exhibits, marked AE L and  AE M. Department
Counsel had no objections and they were admitted into evidence as identified. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 13, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his current
employer since 2005. Applicant retired from the Navy in June 2005 as a petty officer
first class (E6). He possesses a bachelor’s degree. His is currently married to his
second wife. He has a 12-year-old stepdaughter who resides with him and his current
wife. (GE 3; Tr. 33-34, 61-63.)
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he
has made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR
identified 9 delinquent debts totaling $23,942. Applicant denied each debt in his Answer.
However, each of the debts can be found in at least one of the four credit reports placed
into evidence by the Government. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 9.) His debts are as follows:
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for an electric company in the amount
of $117 (as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). This debt has been delinquent since April 2006.
Applicant testified that he contacted the electric company directly and was told they
could not find the account in their system. He requested the electric company provide
him a letter to this effect, but he had not received the letter at the close of the record. He
testified that he did not directly contact the collection agent for this creditor. (GE 6; AE
K; AE L; Tr. 36-37, 39-40, 64.) This debt is unresolved.
Applicant was indebted to a bank on five Federal student loans totaling $6,735
(as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g).  As of January 2008, his student loan
debt totaled $30,163.23 and was delinquent. A withholding order was issued by a state
commission to garnish his wages at that time. He presented documentation that shows
his student loans were paid in full, through garnishment of his wages, in the fall of 2011.
(GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; AE M; Tr 37-39, 41-42.) These debts are resolved.
3
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the amount of $64 (as alleged in
SOR ¶ 1.c). This debt has been past due since August 2005. Applicant satisfied this
debt on February 22, 2013. He provided a partial copy of his bank statement and a
letter from this creditor indicating this debt was resolved. (GE 5; AE L; Tr. 53.) This debt
is resolved.
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the amount of $9,706 (as alleged
in SOR ¶ 1.h). Applicant testified that this debt was an unsecured loan from a bank.
Applicant’s credit report, dated March 15, 2011, records this debt as being delinquent
since November 2009. In Applicant’s post-hearing documents, he indicated he called
the collection company and verbally contested this debt because he did not recall “ever
opening an account with [original creditor].” He requested the creditor provide proof that
it is a valid debt. He is awaiting that documentation. (GE 5; AE L; Tr. 53-54, 60.) This
debt is unresolved.
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the amount of $7,320 (as alleged
in SOR ¶ 1.i). Applicant testified at hearing that this debt was an unsecured loan from a
bank. Applicant’s credit report, dated March 15, 2011, records this debt as being
delinquent since January 2006. In Applicant’s post-hearing documentation, he indicated,
“I spoke with [the collection agent] regarding the [original creditor] bill of $7320. The
[collection agent] stated they were unable to find my account in their system.” Applicant
requested a letter to this effect, but he did not receive anything before the close of the
record. Applicant also made an inquiry with the original creditor about this debt, but
claims the original creditor was unable to find any record of the debt in their system.
(GE 5; AE L; Tr. 53-54, 60.) This debt is unresolved.
Applicant has a long history of financial problems. In June 1998, he gave a
statement to an agent of the Defense Investigative Service in which he discussed eight
delinquent debts. He attributed his debts at that time to his first wife’s loss of
employment and to their decision to live in an apartment that was “too expensive.”
Applicant attributed his recent financial problems to his first wife’s job loss in 1998, his
separation from his first wife beginning 2002, his divorce in 2006, and expensive
medical treatments to treat his second wife’s (then girlfriend’s) cancer in 2005. (GE 1;
Tr. 33-34, 55-58.)
Applicant testified that to avoid future financial problems, he pays cash for all
purchases. He and his wife moved in with his elderly parents in 2010. They maintain his
parent’s property in lieu of paying rent. As a result, he has been able to save
approximately $5,000 for future emergencies. He has not participated in formal financial
counseling. (Tr. 34-36, 58, 66.)
Applicant is highly regarded by his step-daughter, a friend, and a co-worker, who
wrote letters of support on Applicant’s behalf. In November 2012, Applicant was
awarded an individual excellence award for his contributions to his employer. A 2010
performance review indicated that Applicant is a successful contributor to his team. (AE
F; AE G; AE L.)
4
Applicant was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal while
serving in the Navy. His DD Form 214 also reflects that Applicant earned three Sea
Service Deployment Ribbons. (AE H; AE L.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant has incurred financial difficulties since June 1998. While he has
satisfied some of his delinquent accounts, others remain unresolved despite his
apparent ability to repay them from savings. The evidence supports the application of
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or
mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
1See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). 
2See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). 
6
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has the burden of showing that future delinquencies are unlikely to
occur and that his financial decisions do not cast doubt on his current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant still has a significant amount of delinquent
debt. Of his delinquent accounts, his five student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and
1.g) were resolved involuntarily through garnishment. One other small debt of $64 (SOR
¶ 1.c) was resolved after the hearing. Applicant waited until after the hearing to contact
the remaining creditors. He failed to present sufficient evidence that he is addressing
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.h, and 1.i. in a responsible manner or that he has the
discipline or budget to resolve them. These three debts total $17,143, and constitute
over 70% of the total debt alleged on the SOR. Applicant’s choice to ignore his debts
from 2006 through early 2013 cast doubt on his judgment during that time period. I
cannot find AG ¶ 20(a) applies.
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. Some of Applicant’s debts are attributable to
conditions beyond his control like his first wife’s unemployment, his divorce, and his
second wife’s cancer treatments. However, these events took place over five years ago
and Applicant has made little effort since then to address the delinquent accounts.
Further, to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to demonstrate a track record of
responsibly addressing his delinquent accounts. Instead, his delinquencies resulted in
an involuntary garnishment to repay his five student loans. One additional account was
satisfied, after the hearing. He failed to document any action on his largest debt listed
on the SOR. I am unable to make a determination that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances.
Applicant testified that he had not attended financial counseling or established a
solid budget to address his financial obligations. Hence, there is no indication that
Applicant’s remaining delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶
20(c) does not apply.
An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off
each and every debt listed in the SOR.1 All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and
taken significant actions to implement that plan.”2 However, the Appeal Board has held,
“On it’s face, satisfaction of a debt through the involuntary establishment of a creditor’s
garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith initiation of repayment by the
3 ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009.)
7
debtor.”3 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g were resolved involuntarily through
garnishment and thus, this mitigating condition is inapplicable to those debts. Applicant
has only initiated a good-faith effort to repay one of his debts (SOR ¶ 1.c). He presented
no plan to satisfy his remaining debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.h, and 1.i). AG ¶ 20(d) is
inapplicable.
Applicant believed that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i were for additional loans
he had repaid through the garnishment. In post-hearing documentation, he claimed not
to recognize the accounts and to have verbally disputed the debts with the creditors. He
presented no documentation to confirm that he was in the process of formally disputing
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, and 1.i. He failed to provide proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
evidence of his actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is well respected by
those who know him. He served honorably in the Navy, and was recognized for his
meritorious service. He has worked for his current employer for approximately eight
years and performs his job satisfactorily. However, he has a long history of neglecting
his personal finances. While he has taken some steps to reduce future delinquencies,
such as only using cash for purchases and residing with his parents to eliminate rent
payments, he has not fully demonstrated that he has established a responsible plan and
budget to resolve his remaining obligations. Prior to this hearing, Applicant took minimal
action to address his debts. Applicant needs to be proactive in researching his debts
and following up on his financial responsibilities. If he continues to monitor his finances,
8
and follow-up with his remaining creditors, he may be eligible for a security clearance in
the future. However, at this time, he has not demonstrated the responsibility required to
hold a security clearance. Despite his failure to establish Guideline F mitigating
conditions that require a substantial good-faith effort to resolve delinquent debts giving
rise to security concerns, I find in his favor concerning the debts that were repaid after
the hearing or through garnishment because they present no future potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress, and reflect no continuing irresponsibility.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN
Administrative Judge
