 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09571 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 7, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 12, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 27, 2013. 
 
2 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibit (AE) A (AE A was further 
sub-tabbed by Applicant using A through F), which was admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
He submitted AE B through D, which were admitted into the record without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 7, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant affirmatively waived the 15 day notice requirement contemplated by the 
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, paragraph E.3.1.8. Additionally, Department 
counsel indicated she verbally notified Applicant on February 5th and 6th about the 
hearing date and location, which is more than 15 days from the date of the hearing 
(February 27th).1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.j. He denied ¶ 1.a. The admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since January 2011. He is an evaluation engineer. He has a 
master’s degree. He is married (his second). He has three children from his first 
marriage and two stepchildren from his second marriage. He is required by court order 
to pay alimony to his ex-wife, but he is currently about $40,000 to $50,000 delinquent in 
those payments. The arrearages for his alimony payments are not alleged in the SOR. 
He retired from the Navy after 24 years of honorable service. He retired as a lieutenant, 
after first serving as an enlisted member for 13 years.2  
 
 The SOR alleged 10 delinquent debts totaling about $58,903. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained in November and July 2012, and May 2011.3  
 
 Applicant retired from the Navy in 2004. Shortly thereafter, he obtained 
employment in the state where he was residing. The job paid well, but the cost of living 
was extremely high. He worked in this position from 2004 to 2006. He sought 
employment elsewhere, in a less costly area, and was hired for a position in another 
state. He moved and took this position in the spring of 2006. His income was about 
$30,000 less than his previous job. In December 2006, he was promoted within the 
company, but the promotion required a move to a new location in a different state. He 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 10. 
 
2 Tr. at 6, 25-26, 31, 57; GE 1. Note: The non-alleged debts will not be considered in applying the 
disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in applying the mitigating conditions and in making a 
whole-person assessment. 
 
3 GE 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
purchased a home in this new location. By his own admission, he bought a home, 
“much larger than I needed.” He was terminated from his job in July 2008. The reason 
for the termination was that he fraternized with another employee (his future second 
wife). He initially contacted an attorney about the possibility of a wrongful termination 
lawsuit, but was advised not to pursue it and he did not. He was making about $100,000 
at the time he was terminated. From about August 2008 until about July 2009, he was 
unemployed and was supporting himself with his military retirement income. It was at 
this point that his delinquent debts began to accrue.4 
 
 Applicant eventually took several hourly wage jobs, beginning in September 
2009. He could not keep up with his mortgage payments and began missing payments. 
His last mortgage payment was in August or September 2008. He attempted to work 
with the lender on alternative options, but according to him, they refused to do so. The 
home was foreclosed in January 2009. He believes there was no deficiency accruing to 
him after the foreclosure. He obtained his current position in January 2011 and earns 
about $80,000 annually. His wife does not work. He has not sought any financial 
counseling.5 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1760) is a collection account for past due rent. 
In November 2012, Applicant settled this debt by paying less than the full balance. This 
debt is resolved.6 
  
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account for a delinquent telephone 
debt in the amount of $353. Applicant admitted this debt in his answer. He has taken no 
action concerning this debt. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are delinquent accounts to a credit 
union in the amounts of $8,072 and $20,504 respectively. Applicant admitted both debts 
and he supplied documentary proof that he was issued an IRS Form 1099-C, 
cancellation of debt, for SOR ¶ 1.d. He stopped making payments on SOR ¶ 1.c in 2008 
and has not made any payments since then. Both debts are unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a collection account for a delinquent credit card 
debt in the amount of $2,163. Applicant admitted this debt in his answer. He has taken 
no action concerning this debt. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-30; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 28, 30, 32-33, 38, 58, 61; GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. at 36; AE A (B-1). 
 
7 GE 3-6; AE A (B-2). 
 
8 Tr. at 38, 41, 47; GE 3-6; AE A (B-3, B-4), C. 
 
9 Tr. at 49; GE 3-6; AE A (B-5). 
 
 
4 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a collection account for a delinquent consumer 
debt in the amount of $4,638. Applicant admitted this debt in his answer. He has taken 
no action concerning this debt. He supplied documentary proof that he was issued an 
IRS Form 1099-C, cancellation of debt, for SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is the first mortgage on his home, which was 
foreclosed in January 2009. Applicant admitted this debt. He testified that he does not 
owe a deficiency on this debt. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a delinquent collection account for an 
automobile repossession in the amount of $11,609. Applicant admitted this debt and 
provided documentation showing one payment for $305 made on February 28th. He had 
a second payment due on March 5th, but he did not present documentation that he 
made that payment. This debt is unresolved.12 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a delinquent collection account for an 
automobile repossession in the amount of $5,397. Applicant admitted this debt and 
indicated no further action by him. This debt is unresolved.13 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is a collection account for a delinquent credit card 
debt in the amount of $4,407. Applicant admitted this debt in his answer. He testified 
that he did not recognize this debt and that his ex-wife may have opened this account 
during their marriage. He also admitted that their property settlement for the divorce did 
not allocate responsibility for debts. He has taken no action concerning this debt. This 
debt is unresolved.14 
 
 Applicant provided a budget showing that after expenses he has a monthly 
disposable income of about $293. This budget does not allocate any funds for the back 
alimony he owes. He presented documentary evidence showing that he repaid a 
delinquent credit account that was not alleged in the SOR. He offered documents 
showing he was rehabilitating his credit. He presented character letters from three work 
supervisors. All attest to his work ethic and integrity. All recommend him for a security 
clearance. He also offered his work appraisals which characterize him as a “better than 
expected” employee, which is the second highest appraisal category. He also provided 
copies of several company awards and certificates that he received.15 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 50-51; GE 3-6; AE A (B-6), C. 
 
11 Tr. at 32-33; GE 3-6; AE A (B-7). 
 
12 Tr. at 35-36; GE 3-6: AE A (B-8), C. 
 
13 Tr. at 52; GE 3-6; AE A (B-9). 
 
14 Tr. at 53-54; GE 3-6. 
 
15 Tr. at 21; AE A (B-12, C-F). 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has multiple debts that are delinquent. He was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
7 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple. He has paid just one debt and has only 
made one payment under a plan to pay one other debt. The remaining debts have not 
been addressed. His poor financial record and his failure to establish a plan to pay the 
remaining debts casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant was impacted by one year of unemployment and two years of 
underemployment. However, the unemployment was caused by his own misconduct at 
a former job, which led to his termination. It would be difficult to argue that his 
unemployment was caused by a condition beyond his control under these 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counseling. The debt that was paid is resolved, 
however, the remaining debts are not resolved or under control. Even though he 
received a Form 1099-C cancelling two of the debts for tax purposes, this does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve them or absolve him of those debts for the 
security clearance implications arising from them. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies to the 
paid debt. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the paid debt, but does not apply to the remaining 
debts since no good-faith effort was made toward paying those debts. Applicant did not 
provide documentation to dispute the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, 
Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
 
8 
 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, the character evidence on his behalf, his 
job appraisals and awards, and his current service to his employer. I must also consider 
that beyond resolving one debt, he has done very little to resolve the remaining debts. 
Additionally, he admitted to owing as much as $40,000 to $50,000 in back alimony to 
his ex-wife. His past financial track record reflects a troublesome financial history that 
causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
