 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02782 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G and F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 8, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
November 13, 2012, and reassigned to me on January 10, 2013. The Defense Office of 
 
2 
 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 28, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 13, 2013. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 22, 2013  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school in 1977. He was in the 
Marine Corps from 1977 to 1983 and was honorably discharged. He completed trade 
school in 1983. He married in 1984. He has a 35-year-old stepson, a biological son age 
27, and biological daughter age 24. His biological children live at home. Both have a 
child. Applicant’s daughter’s child resides with him.1  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to unemployment and 
underemployment. He was laid off from a job he held for 18 years in May 2007. During 
the period May 2007 to May 2010, he was unemployed and underemployed. He 
withdrew a total of about $250,000 from his 401K retirement account. Applicant 
estimated his current indebtedness to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is about 
$49,000. It is alleged that he had a $39,000 tax lien and owed the IRS $67,000. He 
stated that the amount has been reduced. Applicant explained that in 2009, he was 
working almost full-time and incurred a tax debt he did not pay. He was using the 
money to pay his bills. From 2007 to 2009, he would periodically withdraw money from 
his 401K to help pay living expenses, but also so he could pay some of his annual 
income tax debt. He attempted to pay some of his income tax debt with the 401K 
money. He stated he decided to not pay his taxes because he knew he would need the 
money for living expenses.2  
 
 Applicant began paying the IRS for his tax debt sometime in the middle of 2010. 
He believes he was paying around $1,200 monthly. When he was able to get the IRS 
debt below $50,000 he was eligible to participate in the program “Operation Fresh Start” 
with the IRS. He now pays $800 a month that is automatically withdrawn from 
Applicant’s bank account. He anticipates paying off his car in October and thinks he will 
have additional monies to use toward paying his delinquent debts. Applicant did not 
provide supporting documents to verify his current status with the IRS.3 
 
 Applicant owes a state tax debt of about $3,500. He stated he is making 
payments toward that debt. He estimated he has about $55,000 in other consumer 
                                                          
1 Tr. 20-23. 
 
2 Tr. 23, 26-29, 31-43. 
 
3 Tr. 26-29, 31-43, 87-89. 
 
3 
 
 
credit card debts that are not delinquent. He is making small payments toward their 
balances.4  
 
 Applicant got behind on his mortgage when he was unemployed. He was able to 
get a loan modification on his mortgage, and it is no longer delinquent.5  
 
 Applicant makes $120,000 in annual salary and also receives bonuses. The 
bonuses are unpredictable, but in 2012 he earned $137,000 with bonuses. He 
estimated he has, on average, about $500 remaining at the end of the month. He has 
no savings and about $230 in checking, but had current bills to pay, so it is likely less.6 
 
 Applicant also attributes his financial problems to his wife whom he described as 
having problems with money. She is currently employed and was employed when 
Applicant was not. She has been earning about $50,000 annually. She does not 
contribute anything to the household expenses. Applicant testified she spends all of her 
income and did not help out with the family expenses when he was unemployed.  
 
 Applicant’s wife used their joint credit cards. He was aware that she was using 
the cards. They had a jewelry store credit card that his wife charged $4,000 worth of 
jewelry in 2010 that she gifted to their daughter. He has no fiscal controls over her 
spending habits. He stated he will sometimes “gently prod” her about their finances.7 He 
knows very little about her finances because she does not contribute to the household, 
and he does not question her about them. He stated it was pointless to have a 
discussion with his wife on finances. He closed some joint accounts in 2009 because 
she would take money out of them, and he could not control her spending. He explained 
that he has never gotten a clear answer from his wife on how she spends her money. 
He stated “I have no control over my wife’s finances.” He stated “I have no idea if she 
has credit cards. I am unaware of my wife’s finances. I pay all of the household 
expenses. I have closed some of the accounts. I was shocked when I saw the jewelry 
store account. I thought it had a zero balance.” He stated his wife is not helping with his 
debt but is instead adding to it.8  
 
 Applicant’s daughter and her child live with him. His daughter works about 35 
hours a week in a retail store. She does not contribute to the household expenses. 
Applicant does not think his daughter receives child support, but he does not want to pry 
and ask.9  
                                                          
4 Tr. 43-49. 
 
5 Tr. 28-29; 86 GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. 30-31, 49-51. 
 
7 Tr. 57. 
 
8 Tr. 57-65. 
 
9 Tr. 52-55. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s son was released from prison in December 2012. He was sentenced 
to six years for felony breaking and entering and grand larceny. He also had a 
substance abuse problem. He is ordered to pay restitution for his crimes, pay fines, and 
pay child support. He recently got a job, but has not been paid yet. He does not 
contribute anything to the household expenses.10  
 
 Applicant admitted that in March 17, 2007, and May 4, 2007, he was charged 
with misdemeanor drunk in public. He received a fine. On 12 other occasions from 
December 2007 to December 2011, the police were called to his home for a domestic 
incident. He admitted in his answer to the SOR that he had been drinking alcohol prior 
to the incidents. At his hearing, he stated that he did not believe he was intoxicated and 
could not recall the specifics of each incident, but attributed most of them to his wife or 
daughter calling the police. He stated his wife “would go off the deep end” and had an 
anger issue, and she would get violent and vulgar. Sometimes he would take it and 
sometimes he would not.11 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant was charged with malicious wounding. He 
explained he was the victim because his son had hit him on the head with a ceramic 
cat, and he was knocked unconscious. The police arrived but because his son was 
already on probation his wife lied and said it was Applicant who was the aggressor. The 
case was eventually nolle prosequi.12  
 
In November 2010, Applicant’s wife was issued a temporary restraining order to 
stay away from the residence. She was destroying Applicant’s personal property and 
had hit him with a cabinet door.13  
 
Applicant also admitted that since receiving the SOR, the police were called by 
his daughter in October 2012 and on December 25, 2012, because he and his wife 
were fighting.14  
   
Applicant and his wife have not been to any counseling for mental health issues 
or alcohol issues. Applicant stated his wife does not really drink alcohol. He does not 
believe his wife will benefit from any counseling. Applicant’s wife was never arrested in 
relation to any of the incidents alleged in the SOR. Applicant admitted that he continues 
to consume alcohol on a regular basis, but stated not to intoxication.15  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. 24-25, 52, 55, 80, 84-86. 
 
11 Tr. 25, 66-78, 82-83. 
 
12 Tr. 71-74. 
 
13 Tr. 70. 
 
14 Tr. 67-70. 
 
15 Tr. 76-78, 84. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a federal tax lien and owes money to the IRS. He also owes state 
taxes. His delinquent mortgage has been rehabilitated. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant made financial choices when he was unemployed and underemployed 
that created a federal tax lien and state tax debts. Although his employment situation 
was beyond his control, Applicant did not and still does not have a realistic grasp on his 
finances. He has approximately $55,000 in consumer debt. His wife was working when 
he was unemployed, but he did not talk to her about contributing to the household 
expenses. Instead, he chose to withdraw from his 401K, incur penalties, and owe the 
IRS. He attributes some of his financial problems to his wife’s spending habits, but has 
not reined them in, and nothing has changed. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because he 
has not changed his behavior and future financial problems are likely to recur. His 
choice to incur tax debts was within his control. He could have discussed with his wife 
and children contributing to their household expenses during this time, but he chose not 
to so. He was aware that his wife was misusing their credit cards and did not take action 
to prevent her from incurring new debts. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies because 
Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has had financial counseling. It 
appears Applicant is resolving his tax debts, but he did not provide documentary 
evidence to support his actions with the IRS. Applicant does not have a grasp on his 
finances, and I am not convinced that his financial problems are under control. I find AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant’s testimony was credible that he is resolving his tax 
debts, but he failed to provide documentary evidence. I find AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22, and the 
following is potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 Appellant was involved in 14 alcohol-related incidents from 2007 to 2011, where 
the police were called to his home for domestic problems. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23, and the 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol. He believes that many of the alleged 
incidents were not his fault, and alcohol was not an issue. He does not think he and his 
wife would benefit from counseling. Applicant’s conduct did not happen under unusual 
circumstances and the evidence supports that his behavior is likely to recur and casts 
doubt on his reliably, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Since 2011, the police have 
been at his house twice more for incidents. Applicant does not acknowledge that alcohol 
may be playing a role in his problems. The above mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He was unemployed and underemployed for a period 
of time that affected his financial stability. He incurred a tax lien for failing to pay all of 
his federal income taxes, and he withdrew funds from his retirement account that 
 
9 
 
 
created tax issues. His wife was employed the entire period of time Applicant was 
unemployed, but did not contribute to the monthly expenses. Applicant has about 
$55,000 in consumer debt on which he is making minimum payments. He has no 
savings. He does not have a grasp on his financial situation. Since 2007, the police 
have been to his house at least 16 times regarding domestic incidents where alcohol 
was involved. He disputes that alcohol was involved in some of the incidents, and he 
continues to consume alcohol. He does not believe counseling will help his situation. 
Under the circumstances, Applicant’s finances and alcohol consumption are a security 
concern, and he has not met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations and alcohol consumption 
guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   2.c:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
