 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-09060 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 4, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is delinquent on 22 accounts in the amount of $50,620.88. Only one of 
her delinquent accounts is allegedly being satisfied, and that through an involuntary 
garnishment of Applicant’s pay. Further, she falsified her answers to questions on her 
Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P). She has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations or Personal Conduct trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive personal information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her SF 85P on December 22, 2010. (Item 5.) On September 
26, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, which detailed reasons why the Department of Defense could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a determination of trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility for 
Applicant to hold a Sensitive Systems Position (ADP-I/II/III). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on October 2, 2012. (Item 4.) By 
email dated November 8, 2012, Applicant requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM) to the Applicant on 
December 3, 2012. The Applicant received the FORM on December 12, 2012, and was 
given 30 days to submit any additional information or object to the material submitted by 
Department Counsel. Applicant expressed no objections, and did not submit any 
information within the time period of 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on February 22, 2013. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Applicant is 35 years old. She is employed by a defense contractor and is 
seeking to obtain a determination of trustworthiness in connection with her employment. 
She is married and has three minor children. She also supports her mother, who is ill. 
(Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant has been fully employed since August 2010. From May 2009 until 
August 2010, she was unemployed. She also experienced periods of unemployment 
from August 2008 to November 2008, and August 2004 through November 2004. All of 
her periods of unemployment were a result of employer initiated reductions in force. 
(Item 6.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for trustworthiness 
determination because she is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant admitted allegations 1.a through 1.j, 
1.l, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r through 1.u, and 1.w. under this paragraph. Those admissions are 
findings of fact. She denied allegations 1.k, 1.m, 1.q, and 1.v. 
 
Applicant is alleged on the SOR to be indebted on 22 accounts in the amount of 
$50,620.88. Credit reports dated January 20, 2011, and June 27, 2012, along with 
states’ records of Judgment and Lien Filings, show each of the debts identified on the 
SOR. In Applicant’s answer to interrogatories, she indicated that she was going to 
resolve her debts by “filing bankruptcy [sic] middle of Sept. 2012.” However, she 
provided no documentation to show she followed through on her stated intent. She also 
filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 2000. In January 2001, those debts 
listed in the October 2000 bankruptcy filing were discharged. (Item 6 through Item 16.) 
Applicant’s interrogatory answer indicated: 
 
I have been working and the position that I accepted originally, did not pay 
enough for me to make payments on debts I owed, as well as continue to 
 
3 
 
provide for my family. I recently received a raise at a new position for a 
different company, but am now being garnished for one of the debts that I 
owe on a [repossessed] car. I am saving to file bankruptcy Chapter 7, so 
that I can get a clean slate and a financial beginning. (Item 6.) 
 
Applicant indicated that the debt alleged in 1.k. was being repaid involuntarily 
through the garnishment, referenced above. She provided no documentation showing 
any payments made through garnishment, and no explanation for her denial of 
allegations 1.m, 1.q, or 1.v. Record evidence indicates that all of her delinquent debts 
remain outstanding. (Item 6.) 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
In SOR ¶¶ 2.a, and 2.b, the Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a 
position of public trust because she failed to provide truthful and candid answers on her 
SF 85P. Applicant denied allegations 2.a and 2.b.  
 
Applicant’s SF 85P dated December 22, 2010, contains negative replies to the 
questions pertaining to her financial history. Specifically, she was asked: “In the last 7 
years, have you, or a company over which you exercised some control, filed for 
bankruptcy, been declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or had legal judgment 
rendered against you for a debt?” (Question 22.a); and “Are you now over 180 days 
delinquent on any loan or financial obligation? Include loans or obligations funded or 
guaranteed by the Federal Government.” (Question 22.b). (Item 5.) 
 
In her personal subject interview, adopted by Applicant on August 18, 2012, she 
indicated that she did not know of the judgments against her. However, she provided 
significant details of efforts by collection agents to collect her delinquent debts that were 
over 180 days delinquent at the time she completed her SF 85P. For example, she 
indicated she became delinquent on her car loan (identified in SOR ¶ 1.k) in August 
2004. The debt was placed with a collection agency at that time. She periodically 
received collections notices from the collection agent, but she did not respond to them 
because, “she did not have any money for any payments.” On another account 
(identified in SOR ¶ 1.e), she indicated that a credit card became delinquent in 2008 
when she became unemployed. It was placed with a collection agency in late 2008 or 
early 2009. She could not afford to settle this debt and she ceased communication with 
this creditor. (Item 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness determination, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive personal information. 
 
 
4 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may rely on 
common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the 
world, in making a reasoned decision. 
 
 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive personal information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to such information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
sensitive personal information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of such 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated 22 delinquent accounts, in the amount of $50,620.88, 
after discharging debt through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001. The oldest of the SOR 
listed debts has been delinquent since 2004. Since that time, Applicant has been unable 
to make payments on her debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of showing that future delinquencies are unlikely to 
occur and that her financial decisions do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant still has a significant amount of delinquent 
debt. She failed to present sufficient evidence that she is addressing her debts in a 
responsible manner or that she has the means and discipline to resolve them. She 
indicated that she would file for bankruptcy again, but she failed to present evidence 
that she did so. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant’s debts are partially attributable to her 
unemployment and her mother’s illness. However, Applicant has been employed since 
2010. Since gaining full-time employment, she has done little to address even the 
smallest of her delinquent debts. Further, to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) requires that 
the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to demonstrate 
a track record of responsibly addressing her delinquent accounts. She failed to produce 
any evidence of payments on her debts. She claimed, without corroboration, that one 
debt is being repaid through an involuntary garnishment. I am unable to make a 
determination that she acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence that she attended financial counseling. Further, 
there is no indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 An applicant is not required to establish that she has paid off each debt listed in 
the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that she has established a 
plan to resolve her financial problems and has taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.1 In this case, Applicant has indicated her plan is to resolve her debts through 
another bankruptcy. However, Applicant has not documented any steps she has taken 
to implement her plan. She has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to show that she was in the process of formally 
disputing any of her debts or that she successfully disputed any of her debts in the past. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No.07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008.) 
 
7 
 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant denied falsifying Questions 22a and 22b on her SF 85P because she 
was unaware of a judgment against her. Her explanations with respect to these 
questions are not credible. She admitted in her adopted statement that she had 
defaulted on a car loan and other debts several years prior to completing her SF 85P. 
She did not disclose those delinquent accounts to the Government when she completed 
her SF 85P. Instead, she waited until the Government investigator questioned her on 
the delinquent accounts to disclose her past-due accounts. The Government has 
established sufficient concern under AG ¶ 16(a) to disqualify Applicant from possessing 
a position of trust.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate a trustworthiness concern. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification is unmitigated. The record contains no evidence that she 
sought to correct the falsification promptly after completing the application. Instead, she 
waited to disclose the debts until she was confronted by a Government investigator. 
Therefore AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant offered no proof that she falsified her 
application based upon the bad advice of another. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. 
Falsification of information provided to the Government cannot be considered minor. 
Her conduct reflects negatively on her trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
is inapplicable. Applicant failed to fully acknowledge her falsification and she has taken 
 
8 
 
no remedial steps to show such behavior is unlikely to recur. Therefore AG ¶ 17(d) does 
not apply. Similarly, she presented no evidence of positive steps taken to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
inapplicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has a long history of financial indebtedness. She filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 2000 and discharged her debts in 2001. However, after the discharge of 
her debts, she continued to incur additional delinquent accounts. While some of the 
debts may have been caused by periods of unemployment and her mother’s poor 
health, Applicant did little to address even the smallest of her debts, including debts of 
only $37 (SOR ¶ 1.b), $61 (SOR ¶ 1.m), and $73 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Further, when asked 
about her debts over 180 days past due and judgments filed against her on her SF 85P, 
she intentionally failed to disclose any delinquencies. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
trustworthiness concerns.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.v:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a determination of 
trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility for Applicant to hold a Sensitive Systems 
Position (ADP-I/II/III). Eligibility for access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
