1The SOR contained an allegation under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The Judge issued a formal
finding favorable to Applicant under this Guideline, and this finding has not been an issue during this appeal.
KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s factual findings were reasonably supported by substantial record
evidence.  An appealing party has a heavy burden in challenging a Judge’s credibility
determination.  The presence of some mitigating evidence in and of itself is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge erred.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASE NO: 11-00180.a2
DATE: 03/14/2013
DATE:  March 14, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-00180
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John V.  Berry, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 29, 2011, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 8, 2012, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
2
On June 19, 2012, the Board issued a decision in the case remanding the case to the Judge
for further proceedings.  The remand order was based on the Board’s determination that, although
the record contained sufficient detail to sustain the Judge’s conclusion that the government had
established security concerns regarding Applicant under Guideline E, there was insufficient record
evidence about Applicant’s specific conduct to allow her to properly evaluate the Guideline E
mitigating conditions in relation to that conduct.  Guideline E of the SOR alleged that Applicant was
a defendant in a civil lawsuit that ensued after he left the employ of one company for another. The
lawsuit involved allegations of violations of non-disclosure employment agreements, breach of
fiduciary duty, violation of the state computer crimes act, violation of the state conspiracy act,
common law conspiracy, violation of the state uniform trade secrets act, and conversion.   
The Board also noted that the relative paucity of evidence about Applicant’s specific conduct
was a consequence of the Judge’s application of the collateral estoppel doctrine.  The Board then
ruled that application of the doctrine in this case was problematic in that it prevented Applicant from
fully explaining his conduct and presenting a case in mitigation.  The Board’s remand order
contained instructions that both parties should be afforded the opportunity to present any additional
evidence regarding the civil trial and Applicant’s underlying conduct for the Judge’s consideration.
Pursuant to the remand order a subsequent hearing took place and the parties submitted
additional evidence.  The record was significantly expanded, largely through the admission of
pleadings, transcript testimony, and other documents related to the civil trial.  On December 17,
2012, after the hearing, Judge Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant has again appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge erred in finding that
Applicant had expressed no remorse about his conduct; (2) whether the Judge made erroneous
findings regarding Applicant’s actions with a 100 gigabyte (GB) computer hard drive; (3) whether
the Judge erred in not applying Guideline E mitigating conditions in Applicant’s favor; and (4)
whether the Judge erred in her whole-person analysis. For the reasons that follow, the Board affirms
the Judge’s decision. 
Facts
A statement of the Judge’s findings in the case was included in the Board’s June 19, 2012
decision.  The following recitation of the Judge’s findings in her remand decision includes many of
those same findings, but also includes many additional findings.
The Judge’s pertinent findings in her remand decision are as follows:  Applicant is a senior
program manager for a Government contractor.  He enlisted in the military, earned a commission,
and retired as an officer.  He held security clearances during his military service.
3
After retirement, he worked for a small technology company, for which he signed an
employment agreement, which contained a non-disclosure admonition.  This company was
purchased by Company A, a Defense contractor.  Applicant worked for Company A from 2000 until
2009.  He did not sign a non-disclosure agreement after coming to work for Company A.  The
employment agreement that Applicant had signed earlier stated that it did not terminate as a result
of voluntary or involuntary dissolution of the company, or by any merger or consolidation wherein
the company was not the surviving or the resulting corporation.  Applicant stated that he did not
believe the non-disclosure agreement applied to him when he was an employee of Company A.
However, the jury in his civil trial found that the non-disclosure agreement provisions did apply to
Applicant during his tenure at Company A.  
In January 2008, a former colleague of Applicant left Company A and began a Government
services division at Company B.  In 2009, Applicant and another colleague left Company A and set
to work for Company B.  Upon leaving Company A, Applicant turned in all equipment provided him
by the company.  He took with him a 20 GB hard drive, which he had used at Company A during
the nine years of his employment.  This hard drive was Applicant’s own, the one provided by the
company contained insufficient memory.  He stated that there were personal matters on the
computer, as well as some power point presentations on the hard drive.  
Although Applicant claimed he left Company A on good terms, within two weeks of starting
his new job, Applicant, three other colleagues, and Company B were named as defendants in a
lawsuit.  The civil complaint alleged various kinds of economic harm to Company A.  The case was
tried before a jury, lasting 11 days.  Applicant testified, both on direct examination and on cross-
examination, for 65 minutes.  His position remained that he had done nothing wrong.  
At the trial, Applicant admitted that in the first half of 2009, he and a friend at Company B
discussed gathering together a group of like-minded individuals to do government contracting work
that would include projects similar to those carried out by Company A.  The friend at Company B
asked Applicant to identify individuals who would make good employees at Company B.  Applicant
informed his deputy at Company A that he was accepting a position at Company B.  
Company A was planning to re-compete for a contract it held with the military.  Applicant
assisted his friend at Company B in identifying Company A employees who might be recruited by
Company B in submitting a competitive offer on the contract.  The Company B official sent an e-
mail proposing a meeting date for several Company A employees to meet with him to discuss the
re-compete contract.  E-mails identified at trial by Applicant as either written by him or received by
him demonstrated Applicant’s active involvement in this activity.  
Also at trial, a computer forensic expert testified that her analysis of Applicant’s Company
A computer revealed that approximately three days before Applicant resigned from Company A to
go to work at Company B, a 100 GB hard drive had been attached to his computer and five folders
created.  One of the folders was labeled “Company B.”  Remote image analysis of the files on the
100 GB hard drive and the files on Applicant’s Company A computer revealed that several hundred
files were copied from the company computer to the 100 GB hard drive.  The computer analysis also
2The court entered judgment against Applicant and his colleagues based on all of the claims found against them.
However, the court concluded that the damages were duplicative.  Accordingly, she fixed the damages based on the State
Business Conspiracy Act claim.  Final Order, included in Government Exhibit (GE) 2, Answers to Interrogatories.   
4
showed that once copied to the 100 GB hard drive, the files were deleted from Applicant’s computer
and then also deleted from the computer’s recycle bin.  Applicant acknowledged that he copied files
from his Company A computer to the 100 GB hard drive.  
At his remand hearing, Applicant stated that he had copied Company A material onto the 100
GB hard drive to leave for the individual (his former deputy) he believed would succeed him at
Company A.  The list of items Applicant returned to Company A when he left contains no mention
of a 100 GB drive.  The former deputy stated that he already had all the information he needed in
order to assume duties as Applicant’s successor, and he had no need for any Company A information
that might have been placed on the 100 GB drive.  The former deputy also stated that he never
received the 100 GB hard drive.  Applicant was unable to account for the whereabouts of the 100
GB hard drive.   
At the trial, it was alleged and established that the materials copied to the 100 GB drive
included Company A’s proprietary information and trade secrets.  It was also alleged and established
that Applicant and the current and former employees of Company A and its predecessor company
who went to work for Company B formed a group who planned to use information taken from
Company A in order to compete for a lucrative government contract previously held by Company
A.    
The civil trial jury found Applicant liable for breach of fiduciary duty, breach of the non-
disclosure agreement, violation of the State Computer Crimes Act, violation of the State Business
Conspiracy Act, civil conspiracy, misappropriate of trade secrets,  and for conversion.  
After considering motions by both sides, the judge entered an order of final judgment.  This
order directed (1) Applicant and co-defendants to pay over $12,000,000 for violations of the State
Business Conspiracy Act;2 (2) Applicant to pay $350,000 in punitive damages; and (3) Applicant
and co-defendants to pay over $1,400,000 in attorney fees.  
Applicant and co-defendants filed an appeal to the a higher state court.  The appeal  lists five
assignments of error, all relating to the amount of damages and to evidentiary matters at the trial
pertaining to damages.  Liability was not raised on appeal.  The State Supreme Court ruled in these
matters in June 2012.  It held that Company A’s evidence was insufficient to support an award of
lost goodwill damages.  It upheld the trial court’s awards of trebled and punitive damages in favor
of Company A. 
At his remand hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he had been found liable by the jury
in his trial, but stated that he didn’t do any conversion and that he didn’t do anything.  He stated that
he didn’t move documents to Company B, and that the computer drive he took with him was his own
personal drive.  He indicated that everything he did at Company A was to further the job, and his
3‘[T]he offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under
such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.[.]”
4[T]he individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other
positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur[.]” 
5
moving of documents to the 100 GB hard drive was to help the program office at Company A.  He
stated that he didn’t conspire with anybody and he didn’t poach people.   
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s conduct raised security concerns as
the civil trial jury found against Applicant on the following claims: breach of fiduciary duty; breach
of contract; violation of a state computer crimes act; violation, in concert with other defendants, of
a state business conspiracy act; civil conspiracy, in concert with other defendants; misappropriation
of trade secrets; and conversion.  She concluded that Applicant’s personal conduct, which involved
failure to follow rules and regulations for safeguarding his employer’s trusted information, was not
minor, so remote in time, so infrequent, or occurred under such unique circumstances that it was
unlikely to recur and therefore did not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.  Therefore, mitigating condition ¶ 17(c)3 does not apply.  The Judge concluded that
Applicant failed to demonstrate that he understood the gravity of the conduct for which the jury
found him responsible.  He repeatedly insisted he had done nothing wrong, and he failed to
demonstrate that he understood what had caused his unreliable conduct.  He was unable to ensure
that such behavior was unlikely to recur.  Therefore, mitigating condition ¶ 17(d)4 does not apply.
The Judge noted that Applicant joined with others to misappropriate his employer’s proprietary and
trade secret information.  He participated in activities to encourage other employees of Company
A to accept employment with Company B.  Applicant’s reason for copying hundreds of files
containing proprietary and trade secret information from his Company A computer to a 100 GB hard
drive was not credible.  The Judge finally concluded that  Applicant failed to mitigate the security
concerns arising under the personal conduct adjudicative guideline.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he insisted that he had done nothing wrong.
Applicant asserts that he clearly accepted responsibility for the very unique situation that occurred
to the extent that he could.  Applicant states that he has been clear that he understood the
significance of the underlying civil litigation, and that he would have handled the issues differently
in the future.  Applicant states that in a civil action of the type he was involved in, it would be
impossible to be able to admit and express remorse for the exact misconduct found by the jury
because the specific misconduct was not defined by the jury.  Applicant has not demonstrated error
on the part of the Judge.  Neither the record nor the jury’s findings are as vague as Applicant’s
appeal argument suggests.  The expanded evidentiary record developed on remand included
evidence of Applicant’s specific conduct.  Contrary to Applicant’s assertions, it also contained jury
findings that, when considered along with record evidence developed at trial, are specific as to what
actionable conduct Applicant engaged in.  These facts, with Applicant’s testimony at the remand
5Tr. 2 at 137 cited in Remand Decision at 10.
6The Judge specifically rejected Applicant’s explanation that he left the 100 GB hard drive at Company A when
he departed the company so that his successor could use the company information to carry out his duties.   
7Applicant asserts that ¶17(d) should have applied to the case, but he does not provide any independent
argument regarding that mitigating condition, choosing instead to focus his arguments under ¶17(c) and ¶17(f).  An
appealing party must set forth its claims of error with specificity. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0429 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul.
6
hearing, provide a reasonable basis for the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant continues to assert his
lack of culpability for the conduct that was the subject of the jury verdict against him.  The Judge
cites to specific parts of Applicant’s testimony during the remand hearing wherein he denied doing
some of the things that provided the basis for the jury’s rulings.5  Applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or his ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case no. 06-17409 at
3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).    
Applicant argues that the Judge made erroneous factual findings regarding Applicant’s
involvement with the 100 GB hard drive.  He noted that the Judge found that he attached a 100 GB
hard drive to his company computer and copied hundreds of company files to that external drive,
and that the Judge did not accept Applicant’s explanation for what he did with the 100 GB hard
drive, nor did she accept Applicant’s theory that he had no nefarious purpose in downloading the
documents.6  After a review of the record evidence, the Board concludes that the Judge’s finding is
reasonably supported by that evidence.  Applicant’s appeal arguments on this point essentially set
forth his version of the record evidence, which is not sufficient to demonstrate error.  The Judge’s
findings regarding the 100 GB hard drive are based in part on an assessment of Applicant’s
credibility.  An appealing party has a heavy burden to demonstrate that a Judge’s credibility
determination is unsustainable in light of all the contrary record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
00-0417 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2001).  The Board concludes that the Judge’s assessment of the
credibility of Applicant’s explanations regarding the 100 GB hard drive is sustainable.
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in not applying mitigating condition ¶17(c) in
Applicant’s favor.  He states that the circumstances of this case all involve a single civil action and
that the issues raised happened only once, were extremely rare, and were highly unlikely to ever
occur again.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make
a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as
a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  In her decision the Judge
specifically concluded that the conduct was not minor and was not remote in time.  These two
elements are included in ¶17(c) as well as any considerations of frequency or uniqueness.  The
Judge’s conclusion that these two elements are absent is sustainable and the record supports her
conclusion that Applicant’s conduct was not infrequent and did not occur under such unique
circumstances as to overcome the government’s security concerns.  Applicant has not established
error.7    
9, 2001).  Therefore the Board will not consider whether ¶17(d) should have been applied in the case.   
8“[T]he information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability[.]”
7
Applicant argues that the Judge should have considered mitigating condition ¶17(f)8when
deciding the case.  He states that the allegations in the civil trial came from Company A and its
personnel, and as a result of the trial, Company A was found civilly liable with respect to making
a false statement.  It is true that Company A was found liable for defamation and was ordered to pay
Applicant compensatory and punitive damages.  The nature of the defamation was the publication
by Company A of statements regarding purported DoD investigations of Company B and Company
B personnel. The defamation count was but one count in a civil action comprised of dozens of
counts.  The defamation issue was ancillary to the main thrust of the case and arose out of facts
occurring after the actions for which Applicant was found liable.  Despite being found liable in a
single defamation count, Company A was also the source of the evidence that led to the jury verdict
against Applicant and others on multiple counts.  The jury verdict was approved by the trial judge
and was not challenged on appeal.  Under these circumstances, the Board concludes that the Judge
was not required, as a matter of law, to apply ¶17(f), or to conclude that a winning plaintiff in a large
and complex civil lawsuit was a “questionable source.”   
Applicant asserts that lost in the Judge’s whole-person analysis is any balancing of a
dedicated public servant’s career over a long period of time, against a one-time civil action.
Applicant points to his lifetime of access and protection of highly classified information, and recites
the many accolades he received from colleagues and acquaintances, who noted his skill, honesty,
and integrity.  Applicant’s history of achievement and his favorable reputation was evidence that
the Judge was required to consider.  Central to the Judge’s analysis under the whole-person concept
was the seriousness of Applicant’s misconduct and the fact that, while he denied any wrongdoing,
Applicant failed to rebut the allegations against him.  The Judge’s whole-person analysis is
sustainable on this record.     
We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by substantial record evidence,
that is, “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See
ISCR Case No. 11-00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  The Board does not review a case de novo.
The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4,
2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is
sustainable.
8
Order
The Judge’s remand decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Concurring Opinion of Administrative Judge James E. Moody
In my view, the Judge’s original adverse Decision was affirmable.  There is nothing in the
Remand Decision to change my opinion, insofar as it describes even more extensive misconduct
than was apparent from the Judge’s original findings of fact.  The adverse conclusions in the
Remand Decision concerning mitigation are supportable. 
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
