KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant’s first use of marijuana occurred in 2007, while he held a clearance.  The
Judge concluded that under the circumstances of the case, Applicant’ drug use did not occur so
long ago as to demonstrate an intent to refrain in the future.  The Judge’s ultimate finding that
Applicant had not mitigated the security concerns in his case is sustainable.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-09172.a1
DATE: 03/19/2013
DATE: March 19, 2013
In Re:
------------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-09172
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 15, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January
11, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his credibility
determination and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor.  He has held a security clearance since
2005.
Applicant used marijuana on five occasions between October 2007 and May 2010.  He stated
that the uses occurred in social settings.  On the last occasion, he was attending a party at the home
of a friend.  Applicant ate some brownies, not realizing that they were laced with marijuana.  Only
after he felt the effects of the drug was he told that the brownies contained marijuana.  In his April
2011 clearance interview, Applicant discussed his drug use.  However, he did not mention
unknowing ingestion during this interview.  Applicant has not sought any kind of drug counseling.
The Judge’s Analysis
Concluding that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guideline H, the Judge
noted aspects of the record that detracted from Applicant’s effort to demonstrate mitigation.  He
noted that Applicant’s apparent first use of marijuana occurred in 2007, while he held a clearance.
The Judge concluded that, under the circumstances of the case, Applicant’s drug use did not occur
so long ago as to demonstrate an intent to refrain in the future.  The Judge also stated that he did not
find Applicant’s testimony about unknowing ingestion to be credible.  He stated that the first time
Applicant mentioned this issue was at the hearing, although at the time of his 2011 interview his
memory of the event should have been clearer.  The Judge ultimately found that Applicant had not
mitigated the security concerns in his case.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that his testimony about unknowing ingestion
lacked credibility.  Applicant contends that he did not mention this subject in his 2011 interview
because the interviewer did not seek details about the particular circumstances of each use of
marijuana.  We are required to give deference to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1.  See also ISCR Case No. 10-08390 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2012).   We have examined
this assignment of error in light of the record as a whole.  We note that Applicant addressed his drug
use in his interview, in his answers to DOHA interrogatories, and in his Answer to the SOR.  He did
not discuss or even mention unknowing ingestion in any of these venues.  In fact, in his Answer to
the SOR, Applicant’s admitted that his drug use from 2007 to 2010 “was a mistake and was a poor
decision. . .”  This is not consistent with his hearing testimony.  A reasonable person could believe
that the testimony about unknowing ingestion was a recent fabrication.  We find no reason to disturb
the Judge’s credibility determination.   
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s adverse conclusions about mitigation.  He contends
that his drug use was not recent, contrary to the Judge’s credibility determination.  He contends that
the Judge did not properly weigh his testimony that his 2010 use was unknowing, and he argues that
his last instance of knowing use was actually in 2007, which was so long ago as to demonstrate that
his behavior has changed.  However, as stated above, the Judge’s credibility determination was
supportable, based on the record before him.  Accordingly, he did not err in concluding that
Applicant’s last incidence of knowing use was in 2010.  Moreover, there is no “bright-line” rule as
to recency of drug use.  In evaluating recency, as is the case with other issues in mitigation, the
Judge must consider the evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03941 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Aug. 2, 2007).  Given evidence that Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions while holding
a clearance, and given the Judge’s adverse credibility determination, we find no error in the Judge’s
treatment of the pertinent mitigating conditions.  A disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05854 at 3 (App. Bd.
Nov. 8, 2010).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order  
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
