 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-00365 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 24, 2010. On 
November 14, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 20, 2012; answered it on December 4, 
2012; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on January 18, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on 
January 23, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on January 29, 2013, scheduling it for February 27, 2013. I convened the 
 
2 
 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
E, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until March 15, 2013, 
to enable Applicant to submit additional evidence. She timely submitted AX A.1.a.(3), 
AX E.4, and AX F,1 which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on March 12, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.d. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c and 1.e-1.l. In her responses to 
DOHA interrogatories dated September 26, 2012, and at the hearing, she denied SOR 
¶ 1.d. (Tr. 42; GX 2 at 94.2) Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old administrative assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2010. She has worked for defense contractors since May 
2007. She was a co-owner and business manager for a construction company that she 
and her husband owned and operated from February 2000 to May 2007. She has never 
held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant married in July 1989. She and her husband had two sons, born in 1990 
and 1995. She testified that her husband began using drugs around 1995. He became 
violent, and he began associating with undesirable people. They separated in March 
2005, and divorced in August 2006.3 (Tr. 69; AX C.1.)  
 
Applicant’s husband was ordered to pay child support and spousal support 
totaling $2,400 per month. (Tr. 29.) Her husband did not comply with the support order 
and, by November 2008, he was $20,453 in arrears. She agreed to reduce his support 
obligation, and he was ordered to pay $365 per month in child support, $900 per month 
in spousal support, and $135 per month toward the arrearage; (Tr. 30; AX C.2.) As of 
the date of the hearing, the arrearage had increased to $63,398, and a court hearing 
was scheduled in March 2013, to deal with the arrearage. (AX C.3 and AX C.4.) 
 
When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in October 2010, she 
discovered that her ex-husband had incurred numerous business and personal debts 
without her knowledge, using accounts that he had established in her name during their 
marriage. (GX 2 at 97-100.) She contacted each of the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
                                                          
1 AX A through E each consisted of multiple documents, labeled with additional numbers and letters. The 
labeling of AX A.1.a.(3) and AX E.4 incorporated the additional exhibits into the groups of exhibits marked 
as AX A and AX E. AX F was a new group of exhibits admitted after the hearing. 
 
2 The pagination of GX 2 begins with page 92. 
 
3 Applicant’s security clearance application (GX 1 at 21) reflects that she was married in July 1987 and 
divorced in March 2007, contrary to the information recited in her divorce decree (AX C.1). 
 
3 
 
through 1.l, determined that her ex-husband had incurred the debts without her 
knowledge or approval, and notified the creditors or collection agencies that the debts 
were disputed. (Tr. 61.) When Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f-
1.h, 1.j, and 1.l, she did not retain her dispute records, because she did not realize their 
security significance. Department Counsel conceded that her testimony regarding her 
basis for disputing these debts was credible. (Tr. 73-74.) After she retained an attorney 
to assist her, she began saving the dispute records. (Tr. 34, 64.) At the hearing, she 
submitted documentation of her disputes of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 
and 1.k. (AX A(1), A(2), A.1.a.-A.1.l.) 
 
 Applicant submitted several updated credit reports: Equifax dated January 14, 
2013; TransUnion dated February 12, 2013; Equifax dated January 17, 2013; and 
Experian dated February 18, 2013. (AX A(3)-(6).) None of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c-1.l are reflected on these credit reports. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was deleted 
by Equifax, reported as delinquent but disputed by TransUnion, and is not reflected on 
the Experian report. (AX A(3) at 1; AX A(4) at 3; AX A(6); Tr. 42-47.)  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is reflected in Applicant’s January 2013 Equifax 
credit report as charged off and referred for collection. Applicant admitted this debt, 
which was for a cell phone account on which she cosigned for her sister. She was 
unaware that her sister had allowed the account to become delinquent. At the hearing, 
Applicant submitted an affidavit from her sister in which her sister promised to resolve 
the delinquency. (AX A.1.a (2).) At the hearing, Applicant testified that she would pay 
the debt if her sister did not resolve it. (Tr.40.) On March 19, 2013, Applicant paid the 
debt. (AX A.1.a.(3).) 
 
 Applicant did not dispute the delinquent telephone bill for $116 alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.i. At the hearing, she submitted evidence that the account was current. (AX A.1.i(2); 
Tr. 45.) 
 
 In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant resolved a judgment 
entered for $6,948 in October 2006, a judgment for $3,085 in January 2007, a lien for 
$191 in May 2010, a judgment for $990 in March 2011, and an attorney’s lien from her 
divorce in August 2006. (AX B.1-B.5.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) 
reflecting net monthly income of $5,073, expenses of $2,835, debt payments of $3,363, 
and a remainder of $1,710. (AX A.(7).) She testified that she included alimony and child 
support of $1,400 in her net monthly income, even though her ex-husband had not been 
paying it. Her net monthly income includes rental income of $1,600 derived from renting 
out rooms in her house. (Tr. 37-38.) Even without the $1,400 in alimony and child 
support, she has a net monthly remainder of about $310. She has about $4,095 in her 
retirement account and a sufficient balance in her checking account to meet all her 
financial obligations. (AX F.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals and testimonials from a supervisor, a co-
worker, and a friend establish that she has a reputation for being a dependable, 
dedicated, and hard-working employee, a team player, a devoted mother, and a person 
of high integrity and honesty. (AX D and E.) Her program manager, who interacts with 
her daily, describes her as dedicated, honest, reliable, and trustworthy. He is familiar 
with her financial issues and has been impressed with her swift responses to resolve 
them. In his opinion, she is “one tuff (sic) individual.” (AX E.4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
5 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts. The concern under this guideline is set out 
in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). I conclude that AG ¶ 19(a) and (c) are 
established by Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR and at the hearing.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Although Applicant was confronted with numerous 
delinquent debts, some of which were resolved only recently, her financial problems 
arose under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. She is divorced from her 
irresponsible husband and appears to have learned her lesson after helping her 
irresponsible sister. Her response to her financial problems has demonstrated her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Her marital breakup, the fraudulent and irresponsible 
conduct of her ex-husband, and the irresponsible conduct of her sister were conditions 
beyond her control, and she has dealt with the consequences of their conduct promptly 
and responsibly. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established by Applicant’s prompt resolution of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.i. AG ¶ 20(e) is established by her successful disputes of the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.h and 1.j-1.l. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. She took prompt steps to 
resolve all the debts in the SOR as soon as she learned about them during questioning 
by a security investigator in October 2010. She has a reputation as a dependable, 
dedicated, hard-working employee and a devoted mother. She is meeting all her current 
financial obligations. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
