 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-15260 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 20, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 31, 2012, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 4, 2012. Applicant 
submitted several documents as attachments to his Answer. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On December 12, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on December 18, 2012. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
January 7, 2013. Applicant filed a Response on January 24, 2013 to the FORM within 
the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on February 6, 2013. I received the 
case assignment on January 31, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Pakistan. (Items 6-15) The request and the attached 
documents were submitted as part of the FORM. The facts administratively noticed are 
limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.r, and 2.a and 
admitted all other allegations. (Item 2)  
 
 Applicant is married and has been since 2003. He has three children. He is 47 
years old. Applicant was born in Pakistan. He immigrated to the United States in 2005 
and became a U.S. citizen May 1, 2010. He worked in Pakistan as an English teacher 
until March 2005. He has 26 relatives who are citizens of Pakistan. All but his wife live in 
Pakistan in an area in which Islamic terrorists reside and operate. Applicant’s wife is a 
citizen of Pakistan and lives with him in the United States. Applicant works for a 
government contractor in a foreign country as a translator. (Items 3, 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States on an F32 visa in 2005. He is married to the 
daughter of a naturalized U.S. citizen, allowing him to obtain this type of visa. His wife is 
seeking U.S. citizenship and he states in his Answer that the process is in its final 
stages. After immigrating to the United States, Applicant worked in various retail and 
casino security positions until he became a translator for a government contractor. In 
Pakistan he worked as a school teacher in the public school system. (Items 2, 5) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, six brothers, two sisters, his mother-in-law, one brother-in-
law, three sisters-in-law, one uncle, five cousins, and six close friends are all citizens of 
and residents in Pakistan. They live within the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) state. The 
U.S. Department of State identified the KPK as a terrorist safe haven with a large 
Taliban and Al Qa’ida presence there. Applicant has two brothers, one uncle, five 
cousins, and three friends who work for the Pakistan government in various 
departments. Two cousins and one friend work for the Pakistan military establishment. 
(Items 2-5) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 In January 2010 Applicant was issued a Pakistani passport which will expire in 
January 2014. Applicant submitted an affidavit dated June 13, 2011, from his Facility 
Security Officer stating that he surrendered his Pakistani passport. That passport is 
maintained by his security officer in a secure location. Applicant’s Answer denied this 
allegation in the SOR in Subparagraph 2.a because he had surrendered the passport. 
Applicant also renounced his Pakistani citizenship on April 11, 2011. The written 
documents evidencing this renunciation are included in the File. The Department 
conceded in the FORM that this security concern was mitigated by that surrender. (Item 
2) 
 
 Since 2005 Applicant has sent approximately $13,000 to assist his family in 
Pakistan. He has a bank account with a Pakistani bank in which he states there is $50 
at present. He used the account when he worked in Pakistan as a school teacher. 
Applicant’s mother owns a half acre of farm land in Pakistan she inherited from her 
father. His mother also owns a home in Pakistan worth about $55,000, although 
Applicant contends in his Answer that his share would only be about $6,000. (Item 4)  
 
Pakistan 
 
 I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Pakistan Hearing Exhibits.  
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic, created in 1947 after British India was 
partitioned when the British government granted India its independence. Pakistan was 
created for the Moslem population of the Indian sub-continent. Its population is about 60 
million. It has a coalition government led by a prime minister and president elected in 
2009. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan reassessed it relations with the Taliban and 
supported the U.S. and international coalition in their efforts to remove the Taliban from 
power. Many Islamic extremists and terrorists are known to inhabit parts of Pakistan, 
leading to a growth of their insurgency. Although Pakistan has intensified its efforts to 
deal with the violence and terrorists, the country continues to experience serious 
problems. The U.S. Department of State confirms that many border cities are known as 
safe havens for terrorists. Numerous suicide bombings and kidnappings have taken 
place over the past years. Human rights violations continue to be a significant problem, 
as killings, torture, and disappearances remain prevalent. The Pakistani government 
maintains domestic intelligence surveillance activities. The U.S. Government warns 
Americans against travel to Pakistan. (Items 6-15) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three such conditions apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, brothers, sisters, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, uncles, 
cousins, and several close friends are citizens of and residents in Pakistan. In addition 
to their national location, they also live in a region of Pakistan that is a terrorist haven 
with heavy Taliban and Al Qa’ida presence. Other members of his family work for the 
Pakistani government and some work for the Pakistan military establishment. A 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
exists because of the large number of these personal associations in Pakistan. AG ¶ 7 
(a) applies. 
 
 Some of Applicant’s relatives in Pakistan are employed by the Pakistani 
government, including its military establishment. Applicant has family connections to 
these people that create thereby a potential conflict of interest between his obligation to 
protect sensitive information and a possible desire to help his relatives by providing that 
information. AG ¶ 7 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant lives with his wife in the United States. This marital relationship could 
create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
because she is a citizen of Pakistan. AG ¶ 7 (d) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
 
 (f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 None of these mitigating factors apply. Applicant’s numerous family members 
and friends in Pakistan, many of whom work for the government, and many who live in a 
terrorist controlled area, make it likely that Applicant could be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the U.S. Further, he provided no evidence of deep and 
longstanding loyalties to the United States. Applicant’s contact with his relatives is not 
casual or infrequent. Applicant has sent $13,000 to his Pakistani relatives since 2005, 
which is evidence of strong ties to his Pakistani relatives. AG ¶¶ 8 (a), (b), and (c) are 
not applicable. 
 
 Any foreign contacts Applicant has in Pakistan are not part of U.S. Government 
business or approved by the cognizant security authority. AG ¶ 8 (d) does not apply. 
 
 There is no relevant information in the File showing Applicant reported foreign 
contacts in accordance with agency requirements. AG ¶ 8 (e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Applicant’s $50 bank account and his mother’s house and farmland are likely to 
be a cause of  conflict of interest and they could be used to manipulate him. Therefore, 
AG ¶ 8 (f) does not apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 states the security concern involving foreign preference:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant possessed a Pakistani passport. AG ¶ 10 (a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
 Applicant’s dual citizenship was based on his birth in Pakistan. He did renounce 
his Pakistani citizenship in writing in 2011. His Pakistani passport was surrendered and 
his security officer is maintaining it in a secure location. Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 11 
(a), (b), and (e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has extensive family and 
personal contacts in Pakistan with people who live in a terrorist dominated area. These 
are significant security concerns. There is great likelihood for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress because of these associations. They are ongoing.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. He did mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for Foreign 
Preference. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                       
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
