                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)     
)
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 11-12659
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Greg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On August 21, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not
make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security
clearance. DOD recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether
a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
2
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September
1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 5, 2012, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on November 26, 2012. The case was
scheduled for hearing on December 4, 2012. A hearing was held as scheduled. At
hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3); Applicant relied
on one witness (himself) and no exhibits (AEs). The transcript (Tr.) was received
December 12, 2012.  
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of facts
covered by 23 source documents. Included are the following documents: Background
Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State (March 2008) with U.S. Relations with Iran, U.S.
Department of State Fact Sheet (August 2012); Worldwide Threat Assessment of the
Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of
National Intelligence (January 2012); State Sponsors of Terrorism, U.S. Department of
State (July 2012); Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3--State Sponsors of
Terrorism Overview, U.S. Department of State (August 2011); Secretary of State Press
Statement-United State Condemns Iran’s Announcement on Qom, U.S. Department of
State (January 2012); and 2011 Human Rights Report: Iran, Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices, U.S. Department of State  (July 2012).
Other documents covered by the Government’s administrative notice request are
comprised of the following: Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage–2009-2011, Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
(October 2011); Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE
and Syria (December 2007);  Iranian Pleads Guilty to Attempted Exportation of Arms
and Money Laundering, U.S. Attorney’s Office (April 2005); Singapore Businessman
Convicted of Secretly Diverting U.S. Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic
Republic of Iran, U.S. Department of Commerce (May 2006); Arms Dealer Pleads Guilty
to Conspiracy to Supply U.S. Fighter Jet Engines, U.S. Department of Justice
(November 2009); U.K. Firm Fined $2 Million After Pleading Guilty to Illegally Exporting
Boeing 747 Aircraft to Iran,  U.S. Department of Justice  (May 2010); Iranian National
Pleads Guilty to Attempting to Export Munitions from the United States, U.S.
Department of Justice  (June 2010); New York Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting
Stolen NBC Night Vision Lenses for Delivery to Iran, U.S. Department of Commerce
(August 2005); Iranian National Charged with Illegally Exporting Specialized Metals from
the United States to Iran, U.S. Department of Justice  (February 2011); Treasury
Designates Multi-Million Dollar Procurement Network for Directly Supporting Iran’s
Missile Program, U.S. Department of Treasury (February 2011); Iranian National
Sentenced to 51 Months in Prison for Plot to Illegally Export Missile Components and
Radio Test Sets to Iran,  U.S. Department of Justice (August 2011); and Five Individuals
Indicted in a Fraud Conspiracy Involving Exports to Iran of U.S. Components Later
Found in Bombs in Iraq, U.S. Department of Justice (October 2011).
3
The remaining documents covered by the Government’s administrative notice
request are comprised of the following: Country Specific Information, Iran, U.S.
Department of State (November 2011); Travel Warning, Iran, U.S. Department of State
(April 2012); Joint U.S.-Canadian Statement: Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister
Canon Express Concern over Continued Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in
Iran, U.S. Department of State (September 2009); Robert Levinson’s 1,000  Dayth
Missing,  U.S. Department of State (December 2009); Wave of Arrests, Harassment,
and Death Sentences in Iran, U.S. Department of State (January 2012).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292, at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. April 12,
2007).  Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that
are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-identified background reports containing facts pertaining to the geopolitical
situation in Iran.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in
the reports addressing Iran’s current state.  
Procedural Issues and Rulings
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel requested leave to
supplement the record with a full record of documents covered by its request for
administrative notice.  For good cause shown, Department Counsel was granted seven
days to supplement the record. Within the time permitted, Department Counsel
furnished the public documents covered by its administrative notice request. 
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with updated information about his wife’s family members and changes (if any) to
his summary of interview previously conducted by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven
days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded three days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with additional
background information about his wife’s parents and siblings and corrections to his
OPM interview summary.  I admitted Applicant’s submissions as AEs A and B. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has a father-in-law and mother-in-law who
are citizens and residents of Iran. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each
of the allegations. He claimed his wife talks with her mother regularly about family
issues. He claimed he rarely talks with his mother-in-law and never talks with his father-
in-law due to language barriers. Applicant explained his mother-in-law is of German
descent and retained her German citizenship; his father-in-law is a retired university
4
professor with no affiliation with the Iranian government. Applicant claimed he has never
seen his father-in-law, and has not seen his mother-in-law since her last visit to the
United States in 1997. Applicant claimed, too, that he has never been asked about his
work by any of his wife’s family members. He claimed he has held a security clearance
continuously since 1985 and would inform his employer’s security department first
should any security problems arise.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer for a defense contractor who seeks to retain
his security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree from an accredited university in May 1982.
(GE 1) He has no military experience and has held a security clearance continuously for
the most part since 1985 (shortly after he went to work for a predecessor of his current
employer). (GE 1; Tr. 28-32)  He married his wife in February 1984 and has one child
from this marriage. (GE 1 and AE B; Tr. 59) 
Applicant’s wife immigrated to the United States in 1977 and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1988. (Tr. 34) She retains her Iranian citizenship, which she
acquired through her father, and has an expired Iranian passport. (AE B; Tr. 35, 56)
Applicant’s wife is a homemaker and occasional substitute teacher. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are both Iranian citizens and
residents. (AEs A and B) His mother-in-law was born and raised in Germany and met
and married his father-in-law in Germany in 1969.  She is a homemaker and has never
worked outside of the home. (GE 2 and AEs A and B; Tr. 51-53) His mother-in-law later
relocated with his father-in-law to Iran where she has resided continuously. (AEs A and
B; Tr. 53)  She holds both German and Iranian passports. (AEs A and B; Tr. 53-57)
Applicant’s father-in-law earned a PhD in soil science from a German university
and briefly served as a professor in Germany before moving back to Iran to accept a
teaching position from an Iranian university. (AE A) His father-in-law is currently retired
from his teaching position and has a government pension. (AE A) However, he  still
maintains his university ties. He does some faculty advising and contributes some non-
government research. (Tr.  39-41) He owns two apartments near the university.
Applicant has several brother-in-laws who retain their Iranian citizenship. His
youngest brother-in-law (BN) was born in Iran in 1970 and moved to Germany in 1993.
(AE B) He has resided in Germany continuously ever since he arrived and holds both
Iranian and German citizenship. (AEs A and B; Tr.44-45) He has a valid German
passport, but never renewed his Iranian passport. (AEs A and B) When this brother-in-
5
law needed financial assistance, his in-laws provided help.  And periodically, Applicant
and his wife provide financial assistance to BN. (Tr. 43, 46)
In 2011, Applicant’s wife’s parents wired funds in U.S. denominated currency
($69,000 to Applicant’s wife and $56,000 to her second-oldest brother, BH) to invest on
the parents’ behalf. (AE B; tr. 47-48) After considerable thought, Applicant’s wife and
her brother settled on the purchase of a rental town house near their home. (AE B; Tr.
47-48) With the remittance proceeds, Applicant and his wife purchased a rental home
for $118,000. (AEs A and B; Tr. 47-55) From the rental income from the investment
property, Applicant and his wife kept some for operating expenses and remitted the rest
to the younger brother in Germany to help him meet his financial needs. (AE B 43, 46)
Based on their identified income sources, the $125,000 remitted to Applicant’s wife and
BH presumably represent much of their  parents’ life’s savings.  Because of monetary
pressures brought to bear on Iran’s financial institutions under the weight of U.S.-led
sanctions, conversion rates for dollars presumably were highly unfavorable in Iran in
2011. Whether the parents made their remittances with the intention of pursuing
residence status in the United States is unknown from the evidence in the record. 
Applicant and his wife provide no financial assistance to Applicant’s wife’s
parents or siblings. (Tr. 42, 48) And neither of the parents provide any financial support
to Applicant and his wife. (Tr.  49) Should Applicant ever be contacted by Iranian
authorities, he assures he would report the contact to his employer’s security
department. 
Applicant’s wife communicates daily with her mother in Iran, but rarely talks to
her father. (Tr. 50) By contrast, Applicant speaks to his mother-in-law occasionally and
never to his father-in-law due to language barriers. (Tr.  27, 49)  Since Applicant’s
father-in-law returned to Iran in 1978, Applicant’s father-in-law has not visited the United
states. (Tr. 36) While Applicant’s wife visited her parents once in Germany, she has
never traveled to Iran to see them. (Tr. 51) 
Besides her younger brother, Applicant’s wife has two older brothers of Iranian
descent. Each of these older brothers holds Iranian citizenship in addition to the
citizenship each holds as a naturalized U.S. citizens.  None of her brothers hold valid
Iranian passports. (AEs A and B) Applicant’s oldest brother (BJ) was born in Iran in
1959 and immigrated to the United States in 1977 to attend an accredited university.
This brother earned advance degrees in electrical engineering and mathematics and
currently teaches engineering classes at a recognized state university. (AE A and B)  BJ
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011 and has not renewed his Iranian passport.
(AEs A and B)
Applicant’s wife’s second brother-in-law (BH) was born in 1969 and immigrated to
the United States in 1977 to attend a state university. (AE B) He earned a PhD in civil
engineering and received U.S. permanent residency in 2005. BH is currently employed
by a state council of governments as a flight engineer and is an adjunct professor for a
local university. BH retains his Iranian and German citizenship, and holds a valid
6
German  passport. (AEs A and B; Tr. 51, 57)  However, BH has not renewed his Iranian
passport. (AEs A and B)
Neither Applicant’s wife nor any of her brothers have taken any steps to
renounce their Iranian citizenship. (AEs A and B) None of Applicant’s three brother-in-
laws would consider renouncing their Iranian citizenship. To do so could endanger their
parents who still reside in Iran. (AEs A and B)  Neither of Applicant’s in-laws have any
connections with the Iranian government to Applicant’s knowledge.  Whether either of
his in-laws have voted in Iranian elections is unknown to him. (Tr. 58) 
Political and economic background of Iran
According to official U.S. State Department documents, Iran is an Islamic
republic that is constitutionally constructed and has a head of state, an elected
president and counsel of ministers, a legislative body composed of a 290-member
Islamic consultative assembly, and a judiciary (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at
6-7). Throughout its long history, Iran has been ruled by numerous dynasties.  Following
a nationalist uprising against the Shah in 1905, Iran enacted a limited constitution in
1906. (id., at 4) 
Two years later, oil was discovered, and Iran began its steady ascension to a
modern, secularized political system.  Under the reign of Reza Shah Pahlavi (an Iranian
officer, who seized control of the government in 1921), Iran enacted policies of
modernization and secularization, established a central government, and reasserted its
authority over the tribes and provinces. (id., at 4-5) During the Allied occupation of
western Iran in 1941, the Shah was forced to abdicate and was succeeded by his son,
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. (id.)
Domestic turmoil swept Iran in 1978 as the result of heated religious and political
opposition to the Shah’s rule and political/economic programs (especially the Shah’s
internal security and intelligence service).  And in February 1979, exiled religious leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from France to direct a revolution resulting in a
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles. (Background Note on Iran, supra,
at 5) Iran’s 1979 constitution allocates the duties of the chosen religious leaders and
governing bodies in such a way that their duties often overlap. Legislative issues on
which the Majles (Iran’s legislative governing body) and the Council of Guardians
(making up Iran’s religious leadership) fail to agree are resolved by the Council of
Expediency (a body created by Ayatollah Khomeini in 1988).  Following the Ayatollah’s
death in June 1989, the Assembly of Experts (an elected body of senior clerics) chose
the outgoing president of the republic (Ali Khamenei) to be the Ayatollah’s successor as
national religious leader. (id.)
Iran’s post-revolution has been marked by an eight-year war with Iraq, internal
political struggles and unrest, and economic disorder.  Its post-revolution regime has
been associated with human rights violations and political turmoil, including the seizure
of the U.S. Embassy in November 1979 by Iranian militants and the hostage taking of 52
7
Americans (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at 5).  Succeeding power struggles
have severely eroded the center and left of Iran’s political institutions, leaving only the
clergy.  Both human rights and state sponsored terrorism remain serious problems in
Iran.  See Administrative Notice, supra, at 2-3.
Long estranged from the West, Khomeini’s regime charted regional goals that
curtail the presence of the United States and other outside powers in the region.  Iran
has been designated a state sponsor of terrorism since January 1984  (Administrative
Notice, supra, at 2; State Sponsors of Terrorism, supra), and remains the most active
state sponsor of terrorism. (Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3--State Sponsors of
Terrorism Overview, supra, at 2) In 2010, Iran’s financial, material, and logistic support
for terrorist and militant groups throughout the Middle East and Central Asia had a direct
impact on international efforts to promote peace, threatened economic stability in the
Gulf, and undermined the growth of democracy. Iran provided weapons, training, and
funding to Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist groups, including the Palestine Islamic
Jihad (PIJ) and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine General Command
(PFLP-GC). (Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3--State Sponsors of Terrorism
Overview, id, at 2)  
In 2010, Iranian authorities continued to provide lethal support, including
weapons, training, funding, and guidance, to Iraq Shia militant groups that target U.S.
and Iraqi forces. (id.)  Also, in 2010, Iran remained unwilling to bring to justice senior al-
Qaeda members it continued to detain. (id, at 3)
In January 2012, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) expressed concern
that the 2011 plot to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador to the United States
demonstrates that some Iranian officials are now more willing to initiate attacks on U.S.
soil in response to real or perceived U.S. threats to their regime. (Worldwide Threat
Assessment of the Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, supra, at 5)  In the same worldwide threat assessment, the DNI assessed
that the most menacing foreign intelligence threats in the next two to three years will
involve espionage  by China, Russia, and Iran. (id.) The DNI’s threat  assessment
included a geopolitical projection that Iran’s intelligence operations against the United
States, including cyber capabilities, have dramatically increased in recent years in both
depth and complexity. (id., at 8)
Iran’s nuclear program remains a pressing U.S. concern.  Since September 2002,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has actively worked to clarify the nature
of Iran’s nuclear program, which has been repeatedly out of compliance with its
international obligations. (Background Note: Iran, supra, at 9-10) The IAEA’s efforts have
included substantial economic incentives packages and assistance in cooperation with
key interested countries comprising the P5+1 group. 
To date, Iran has not responded positively to any of the offered incentives
packages. (id, at 9)  Binding UNSC resolutions calling on Iran to halt its proliferation-
8
sensitive nuclear activities and comply with the non-proliferation treaty (NPT) have been
ignored by Iran.  (id., at 10)
International concerns regarding the nature of Iran’s nuclear program were
deepened and reaffirmed by a November 2011 IAEA report that concluded that Iran has
carried out activities “relevant to the development of a nuclear explosives device,” and
“that prior to the end of 2003, these activities took place under a structured program, and
that some activities may still be ongoing.” (Background Note: Iran, supra, at 10) In
January 2012, the United States condemned the Iranian government’s decision to begin
enriched operations at its QOM facility. (Administrative Notice, supra, at 3; Secretary of
State Press Statement-United State Condemns Iran’s Announcement on Qom, supra)
These ongoing operations bring Iran a significant step closer to having the capability to
produce weapons-grade highly enriched uranium. (id.) 
Although Iran is a constitutional republic in structure, its current supreme leader,
Ayatollah Khamenei, control’s Iran’s security forces, the judiciary, and other key
institutions. (2011 Human Rights Report: Iran, supra, at 1) Even though Iran’s
constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, these practices remain common. Its
regular and paramilitary security forces that share responsibility with Iranian police for
law enforcement and maintaining order are reported to have committed numerous,
serious human rights abuses in recent years (id., at 2-50) 
State Department country reports cite significant restrictions on the right of
citizens to change their government, summary executions (minors included),
disappearances, torture and severe punishments (such as amputations and flogging),
violence by vigilante groups with ties to the government, poor prison conditions, arbitrary
arrest and detention (including prolonged solitary confinement), lack of judicial
independence and fair public trials, political prisoners and detainees, excessive
government violence in Kurdish areas and unknown groups in Arab regions of the
country, severe restrictions on civil liberties and freedom of religion, official corruption,
government transparency deficiencies, legal and societal discrimination against women,
ethnic and religious minorities, trafficking in persons, incitement of anti-Semitism, severe
restriction of workers’ rights, and child labor. (Administrative Notice, supra, at 2-3 and
2011 Human Rights Report: Iran, supra, at 1-50) And in criminal custody cases,  security
forces responsible for arrest and detention often do not inform family members of a
prisoner’s welfare and locations, and often deny visits by family members and counsel.
(id.) 
Addressing reports of human rights violations in Iran, the UN General Assembly
adopted a human rights resolution on Iran in December 2005 that expressed serious
concern at the continuing use of torture in Iran, trafficking in persons, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment, such as floggings and amputations, as well as public
executions (2011 Human Rights Report: Iran, supra, at 58) This resolution followed nine
consecutive years of similar UNGA resolutions of expressed concern over Iran’s dismal
human rights record. 
9
Export licensing abuses by Iranian agents pose additional security concerns for
U.S. security interests associated with Iran. (Administrative Notice, supra, at 4) In
October 2011, the Office of National Counterintelligence Executive reported losses of
sensitive economic information and technologies to foreign entities represent significant
costs to U.S. national security. (Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage–2009-2011, supra at 3) Illicit transfer of technology with military
applications to hostile states like Iran and North Korea risk endangerment  of U.S. lives
and allied military personnel. (id.) 
Numerous cases have been cited covering the illegal export, or attempted illegal
exports, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Iran. Case specific examples include
the following: safety and inspection items (Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export
Violations Involving Iran, UAE and Syria, supra); aircraft parts and fighter jet components
(Singapore Businessman Convicted of Secretly Diverting U.S. Military and Civilian
Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran, supra; Arms Dealer Pleads Guilty to
Conspiracy to Supply U.S. Fighter Jet Engines, supra; U.K. Firm Fined $2 Million After
Pleading Guilty to Illegally Exporting Boeing 747 Aircraft to Iran, supra); and night vision
equipment. (New York Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Stolen NBC Night Vision
Lenses for Delivery to Iran, supra)
Other case examples include specialized metals (Iranian National Charged with
Illegally Exporting Specialized Metals from the United States to Iran, supra); missile
components and radio tests sets ( Iranian National Sentenced to 51 Months in Prison for
Plot to Illegally Export Missile Components and Radio Test Sets to Iran, supra) and radio
frequency modules found in bombs in Iraq (Iranian National Sentenced to 51 Months in
Prison for Plot to Illegally Export Missile Components and Radio Test Sets to Iran,
supra). 
Dual citizens residing or visiting in Iran are subject to all Iranian laws affecting
U.S. citizens, as well as those applicable to persons of Iranian nationality that impose
special obligations on them. (Travel Warning, Iran, supra, at 1-2; Country Specific
Information: Iran, supra, at 3). Dual nationals are subject to Iran’s military service
requirements and can be conscripted into service while on Iranian soil.  Reports indicate
Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign visitors under surveillance, monitor
their hotel, rooms, telephone, and fax machines, search their personal possessions, and
even arrest or detain Iranian-Americans suspected of “acting against national security.”
(Travel Warning: Iran, id;  Country Specific Information, Iran, id.)
Because the Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals as Iranian citizens, regardless of their U.S. naturalization
status, dual nationals who enter Iran only on a U.S. passport risk detention absent
persuasive proof of their formal renunciation or loss of their Iranian citizenship (Country
Specific Information, Iran, supra, at 3) State Department travel warnings urge U.S.
citizens to carefully consider the risks of travel to Iran (Travel Warning, supra, at 1), a
country with which the United States does not have diplomatic or consular relations.
(Administrative Notice, supra, at 4;  Country Specific Information, Iran, supra, at 3) Citing
10
Iran’s non-recognition of dual citizenship and general declination to permit the Swiss to
provide protective services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals, Americans
who travel to Iran are strongly encouraged to register through the State Department’s
travel registration website. (Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, id., at 2)
Currency remittance presents another troubling problem in U.S.-Iranian relations.
U.S. economic sanctions ban most economic activity between U.S persons and Iran.
(Country Specific Information, Iran, supra, at 8-9)  Generally, unless licensed by the U.S.
Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), goods, technology, or
services may not be exported, re-exported, sold or supplied, directly or indirectly, from the
United States, or by a U.S. person (wherever located) to Iran or the Government of Iran.
(id., at 9) With limited exceptions, goods or services of Iranian origin may not be imported
into the United States, either directly or indirectly through third countries. (id.) 
Likewise, Iranian security concerns have restricted money transfers in general out
of Iran. (Country Specific Information, Iran, supra, at 9) For residents and non-residents
alike, external  remittances of local currency (Iran Rial-IRR) are generally limited to key
threshold amounts of IRR 500,000 and of foreign currencies up to 5,000  in U.S. dollars.
Larger remittances normally require a bank statement or a transfer certificate issued
through Iran’s central bank. In general, all foreign exchange transactions must take place
through Iran’s banking system. 
Family remittances from Iran that are transmitted through informal non-banking
channels (sometimes characterized as Hawala networks) are inherently risky. This
method of remittance is challenging and can expose the remitting person to government
monitoring and penalties if detected.
Endorsements 
Applicant did not provide endorsements or personnel evaluations. Whole-person
assessments are necessarily limited to Applicant’s security application, his OPM
interviews, his testimony, and his presented exhibits.   
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied.  The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
11
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including,
but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  (AGs,  ¶ 6)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). The
required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the Government to
affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified
information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, consideration must
take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
safeguard classified information.
12
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
A U.S. citizen by birth, Applicant married an Iranian national in 1984 who has
parents who are citizens and residents of Iran. The Government urges security concerns
over risks associated with Applicant’s wife (a naturalized U.S. citizen who retains dual
citizenship with Iran and holds an expired Iranian passport) and her parents, who are
citizens of Iran and reside there. Applicant’s in-laws have strong roots in Iran. More
specific concerns are directed to Applicant’s wife’s daily contacts with her parents in Iran
and her parents’ remittance of substantial funds in U.S. currency to her brother and
herself for investment in the United States on their behalf. Although these more specific
concerns were not raised in the SOR, they are covered generally by the broad
references to the parents’ citizenship and residence status in Iran. 
 In the past, the Appeal Board has not required the charging of every fact and
detail raised in a hearing so long as the SOR placed the applicant on notice of the
subject matter of security concern.  See ISCR Case No. 01-26479 at 2 (Sept. 2003);
ISCR Case No. 00-0423 at 3 (June 2001) (citing Supreme Court decisions). Like the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, DOHA procedures are governed by notice pleading.
The information pertaining to Applicant’s wife’s contacts with her parents and her
parent’s investment decisions was voluntarily furnished by Applicant in his OPM
interview and hearing, and was not objected to when raised by Department Counsel.
Notice requirements were satisfied in connection with all of the supplied evidentiary
details of Applicant’s wife’s relationships with her parents.  
Iran is a country historically known to practice terrorism, and to exercise
repression and human rights abuses against its own citizens, as well as dual citizens
who visit the country. Because Iranian government military and intelligence authorities
have a history of violating Iranian and international laws and diplomatic protocols, they
are more likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control through his wife and her parents. 
By virtue of the Iranian citizenship and residency status of Applicant’s in-laws in
Iran and the regular contact Applicant’s wife has with her parents, her relationships with
her parents present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition
(DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. Both Applicant’s father-in-law and his mother-
in-law retain links and contacts that could invite oversight by Iranian government officials.
With Iran’s reported history of monitoring email, phone calls, and other communications,
the risks of disclosure of personal information about Applicant’s employment cannot be
13
safely discounted. Whether any personal information about Applicant might have been
passed on to Applicant’s in-laws by his wife’s brothers is unknown but cannot be safely
discounted either.
Although none of Applicant’s in-laws have any identified Iranian prior military or
government service, his father-in-law retains significant links to the Iranian university
system and is presumably well-known in Iran’s university community. Both of his in-laws
remain vulnerable to potential compromise and coercion for so long as they reside in
Iran. Their monetary remittances in 2011 to Applicant’s wife and her brother were
considerable and were made with the understanding the funds would be invested on
their behalf and returned to them upon request. Risks of monitoring large monetary
remittances from Iran are heightened for so long as sanctions remain in place. 
Iran’s currency export regulations limit the export of local currency (Iran Rial-IRR)
up to IRR 500,000 for residents and non-residents of Iran and up to 5,000 in U.S.
EUR/USD currency. (Key Features of the Iran Exchange System, FarsiNet (2006))
Persons seeking to remit larger amounts require approval by Iran’s central bank and
must be routed through Iran’s banking system. Iran can be expected to aggressively
monitor remittances in U.S. dollars for the foreseeable future in the face of the continuing
depreciation of its official currency (the rial) vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar triggered by U.S.-led
sanctions. 
Because of the investment nature of the parents’ remittances, should they ever
request a return of their investment, Applicant’s wife and brother could potentially
encounter restrictive U.S. remittance regulations. For in the United States, U.S.
remittances to Iran in excess of $10,000 in monetary instruments require the filing of a
report with U.S. Customs. Failure to file the report could subject the offender to forfeiture
and result in civil and criminal penalties. While money transfers made on a non-
commercial family basis may be accepted under this regulatory regime, they require the
avoidance of services of an Iranian financial institution to process the remittance.  (31
C.F.R. § 560.616(a)(3)) See United States v. Banki, Docket No. 10-3381 (2d Cir.
October 2011). 
Whether Applicant’s in-laws complied with Iran’s local remittance regulations or
utilized informal Hawala networks to circumvent Iran’s restrictive remittance regulations
is unknown. Depending on what means the parents used to route their remittances to
Applicant’s wife and brother, their fund transfers could be tracked and monitored by
Iranian banking authorities, and ultimately traced to Applicant’s wife and her brother.  As
Iran moves ever closer to a barter-based economy under the weight of U.S.-led
sanctions, Applicant’s in-laws could find their financial resources strained or depleted.
Should this occur, added financial stress could be imposed on Applicant and his wife to
help her parents.
Were either of Applicant’s wife’s parents to be placed in a hostage situation,
Applicant could be subject to conflicts over ensuring his family’s well being and
protecting classified information. For this reason, DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign
14
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between
the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information,” is applicable to the facts of this case.  
Neither of Applicant’s in-laws in Iran have any history to date of being subjected to
any coercion or influence. These historical antecedents do limit the severity of a conflict
situation.  However, the absence of any past coercive measures taken by Iranian
authorities does not absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future given Iran’s rich
history of hostage taking, nuclear development, past collection practices, and abusive
measures taken against its own citizens.
Considering Applicant’s explanations about his wife’s strong relationships with her
parents, her regular contacts with her parents residing in Iran, and her financial interests
in the townhouse investment she undertook for her parents, risks of undue foreign
influence on Applicant, his wife, and her parents residing in Iran cannot be safely
discounted. Applicant’s wife’s contacts with her parents are significant and ongoing
(though quite understandable), and are clearly of the magnitude that could make them
subject to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under Guideline B.
The AGs governing security clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of foreign influence.
What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country may not be in
another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be weighed on a
case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing. Personnel security
assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new AGs for
assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with the individual's having
family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of country risks and
information available from public sources.  In weighing the heightened risks associated
with a particular country, the geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter. 
As demonstrated, Iran has long been known to be a repressive country, whose
state-sponsored authorities have committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in
recent years, and shown little respect for the rule of law.  The U.S. has no diplomatic
relations with Iran.  Iran remains a country on the State Department ‘s state terrorist list,
and one with a known history of hostage taking and human rights abuses of wide
magnitude and scope. Iran is consistently characterized as a country hostile to American
political and security interests since the 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran and ensuing
establishment of an Islamic republic with close ties and support to non-state terrorist
groups.  Based on reported terrorist activities in the country and in other countries in the
region with support links to Iran, its dismal human rights record,  its developing nuclear
program, and its active collection activities, Iran cannot be deemed to provide an
acceptable political and security environment for managing hostage risks. Without such
assurances, no reasonable conclusions can be reached that Applicant’s wife and parents
are not in a position to be exploited by Iranian authorities. 
15
Considering Applicant’s case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant nor his wife’s parents residing in
Iran can be characterized as sufficiently insulated from potential pressures and influence
from the Iranian government and its military and intelligence officials to warrant
application of this mitigating condition. 
 Of some benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and
commitment to the United States and its institutions and values and the absence of any
history of coercive measures taken against any of his wife’s family are well supported. 
Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to
the United States, while considerable, are not enough to neutralize all potential conflicts
that are implicit in his relationships with his spouse and his wife’s parents.  MC 8(c)
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is
little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has some
applicability based on Applicant’s own infrequent contacts with his wife’s parents residing
in Iran. Application of MC 8(c) is necessarily very limited, though, because of the
frequent communications his wife maintains with her parents (particularly her mother)
residing in Iran. 
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation.  MC
8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements regarding
the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations
from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s assurances of
reporting any improper contacts to his employer and his long possession of a security
clearance without any reported incidents. Historically, though, the Appeal Board has
accorded very little weight to stated intentions to take corrective steps in a hypothetical
set of circumstances, absent record evidence that an applicant has acted similarly under
comparable circumstances.  See ISCR Case No. 07-00029, at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 06-24575, at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).
Given that Iran remains a hostile country with no diplomatic relations with the
U.S., and one that lacks a secure infrastructure and track record for respecting human
rights and the rule of law, the risk of a pressure or influence situation involving an
immediate or extended family member of Applicant’s cannot be minimized. Iran’s
strategic location and political character, his wife’s investment relationship and regular
contacts with her parents, and the residency of her parents in Iran, all combine to create
16
security concerns over risks of direct or indirect pressure or influence of a family member
of Applicant’s by Iranian authorities.
Whole person assessment is difficult at best without any endorsements or
personnel assessments, or input from his spouse about her parents’ status. Without
more evidentiary support from Applicant, the evidence in the record does not permit
mitigation of his  exposure to potential painful choices over ensuring the safety and well
being of his wife’s parents and protecting U.S. national security interests. To his credit,
he has a long history of service in the defense industry with continuous security
clearances. Applicant has demonstrated strong loyalties and commitments to U.S. core
values. His length of service in the defense industry and his promises to report any
inappropriate contacts from Iranian sources are encouraging indicators he cannot be
pressured or coerced. 
After carefully considering Applicant’s wife’s connections with her parents in Iran
and the risks of Applicant’s submission to Iranian pressures should his wife or parents be
pressured or coerced by Iranian authorities in the foreseeable future, the weighted risks
of a compromise remain too substantial to become manageable ones at this time under
a whole-person assessment of all of the critical circumstances considered in this case.
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's wife’s relations
with her parents residing in Iran are insufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to
his wife’s familial relationships with her parents in Iran.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraph 1.a of Guideline B. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a:           Against Applicant
Conclusions
 In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
17
