 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )     ISCR Case No. 11-13643 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is estranged from his family members who are resident citizens of 
Israel. These foreign ties do not present an unacceptable security risk. While Applicant 
was seriously behind in his payments on several accounts, all but one of them has been 
resolved. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and explaining why it was unable 
to grant a security clearance to Applicant. The DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 4, 2012, and he requested a 
hearing. On December 4, 2012, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On January 3, 2013, I scheduled a hearing for January 
24, 2013. 
 
At the hearing, four Government exhibits (GEs 1-4) and five Applicant exhibits 
(AEs A-E) were admitted without objection. Applicant, his immediate supervisor, and his 
maternal uncle testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on January 31, 2013. 
At the Government’s request, I agreed to take administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Israel and its foreign relations, including with the United States.1  
 
I held the record open for three weeks after the hearing for Department Counsel 
and Applicant to submit additional documents, and for Applicant to respond to the 
Government’s request for administrative notice.2 On February 14, 2013, Applicant timely 
forwarded seven exhibits (AEs F-L), which were accepted in evidence without objection. 
He filed no objections to the Government’s administrative notice request. Nor did he 
propose any additional facts for administrative notice. The Government submitted no 
new exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline B, foreign influence, that Applicant’s father 
(SOR 1.a), stepmother (SOR 1.b), half-brother (who is in the Israeli military) and half-
sister (SOR 1.d) are resident citizens of Israel; and that Applicant’s sister is a dual 
citizen of the United States and Israel living in Israel (SOR 1.c). Under Guideline F, 
Applicant was alleged to owe delinquent debt totaling $20,531 to five creditors (SOR 
2.a-2.e). 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the Israeli citizenship and residency of his 
father, stepmother, half-brother, and half-sister, but he was not in regular contact with 
any of these foreign relatives. While he acknowledged that his sister had dual 
citizenship with the United States and Israel, Applicant indicated that his sister resides 
in the United States. He had no regular contact with her in several years, and he denied 
                                                 
1
The Government’s request for administrative notice, dated January 22, 2013, and source documents 
were not submitted to me before the hearing. Among the source documents were six news releases from 
the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security reporting on export violations 
committed by U.S. firms, and in one case, by an Israeli citizen. Presumably, the press releases were 
presented to substantiate that Israel actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information. None of the cases involved Applicant personally or involved espionage through any family 
relationships. The anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased 
relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, given there is no evidence that Applicant or 
any member of his family was involved in any aspect of the cited cases.  
 
2
Applicant did not receive the Government’s request for administrative notice until the day before his 
hearing. He was given time after the hearing to review the request and submit any objections to specific 
facts, any proposed revisions, and any new facts for administrative notice. He submitted no objections or 
additions to the Government’s administrative notice documents within the three-week deadline. 
 
 3 
any intent of future contact with her. Applicant denied that he had any foreign interests 
that would cause his loyalty to the United States to be divided.  Applicant admitted the 
debts alleged in the SOR, which he attributed to a lawsuit filed by his sister against him. 
Since her case against him was settled in 2010, he had resolved several debts. He 
intended to pay off his existing delinquencies through a loan from his 401(k), which was 
approved on August 29, 2012. 
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old test engineer and lifelong resident citizen of the United 
States. (GE 1; Tr. 40.) He has worked for his defense contractor employer since late 
January 2011 and seeks his first DoD security clearance. (GE 1; AE E.) In October 
2006, Applicant married a U.S. native citizen, and he and his spouse have a four-year-
old son. (GE 1; Tr. 32-34.) They live with her parents, currently rent free, although 
Applicant and his spouse contribute to the household expenses. (Tr. 32, 45-46.)  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s father is a native citizen of Israel. He served in the Israeli Defense 
Force more than 40 years ago. Applicant’s mother was born in the United States. (GE 1; 
Tr. 33.) In October 1968, while Applicant’s parents were living in Israel, they had the first 
of their three children (sister #1). They had a second daughter (sister #2) in July 1971, 
after they moved to the United States. Applicant was born in November 1972. (GE 1.) 
 
When Applicant was seven years old, his parents divorced. Applicant’s father 
returned to Israel, where he eventually married an Israeli citizen and had two more 
children. Applicant’s half-brother and half-sister, who are now ages 23 and 29, are 
resident citizens of Israel. (GEs 1, 4; Tr. 34-37, 40-42.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother remained in the United States with Applicant and his two 
sisters, and she later remarried. She and her second husband are now deceased. (GE 
1; Tr. 34.) Applicant believes that sister #1, who is naturalized U.S. citizen, may be a 
dual citizen of Israel and the United States. (GEs 1, 4.) Applicant has been estranged 
from sister #1 since 2006 or 2007 due to issues surrounding the family home that was 
deeded to them by their mother. (GE 4; Tr. 31.) Applicant’s sister #1 resides in the 
United States with her husband and children. (Tr. 38.) She is a special education 
teacher. (GE 4.) 
 
 To Applicant’s knowledge, sister #1 keeps in close contact with their relatives in 
Israel. (Tr. 42.) Applicant has also had no contact with sister #2 for some time because 
of the “fall out” with sister #1 about the family home. Sister #2 is divorced. Applicant 
does not know her occupation. (Tr. 39-40.) Applicant invited his mother and sisters to 
his wedding, but they chose not to attend. (Tr. 39-40, 81.) 
 
 
 4 
 Applicant has had sporadic contact with his father over the years.3 (GE 4; Tr. 35-
36.) He has not seen his father since 1999, when his father brought his family to the 
United States for a visit. Applicant has had no contact with his father since 2006, when 
he informed him of his engagement. Applicant invited his father to his wedding in the 
United States, but his father did not attend. Applicant’s father worked in residential 
construction in Israel. Applicant is unaware whether his father is still employed. (Tr. 35-
36.) 
 
  Applicant’s stepmother helped Applicant’s father in his construction business in 
Israel. Applicant last saw his stepmother when she came to the United States in 1999. 
Applicant has no contact with her. He was told by his sister that their father and 
stepmother divorced several years ago. (GE 4; Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 Applicant’s half-brother is a resident citizen of Israel, who was serving in the 
Israeli military as of August 2011. Applicant last spoke to his half-brother five years ago. 
He has not contacted him since then because his half-brother was sympathetic to 
Applicant’s sister #1 in matters involving the home deeded to her and Applicant. 
Applicant has not seen his half-brother since 1999. Applicant invited his half-brother to 
his wedding. He did not attend. (GEs 1, 4; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 Applicant’s half-sister is a resident citizen of Israel.  She works in a hospital or 
nursing facility, although Applicant does not know her occupation or duties. Applicant 
had telephone contact with his half-sister once every two years until 2008. (GEs 1, 4.) 
Like her brother, Applicant’s half-sister knows about Applicant’s dispute with sister #1 
over the property. Applicant’s half-sister was invited to attend Applicant’s wedding but 
did not come. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant does not keep in contact with any of his extended family members in 
Israel, including his grandparents, uncles, aunts, and cousins. He has no real estate 
interests or bank accounts in Israel. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant has a close relationship with his maternal uncle, who is a U.S. resident 
citizen. Applicant paid the mortgage on the family home and cared for his mother. Even 
after Applicant moved out in 2006, he continued to care for the lawn and garden. 
Applicant’s uncle does not think very highly of Applicant’s sister #1 (“I would categorize 
her as the worst person I’ve ever met in the world.”). (Tr. 79-80.) Because of Applicant’s 
sister, Applicant and his uncle had no contact with Applicant’s mother for the last few 
years of her life, until 24 to 36 hours before her death, when she was persuaded to see 
them, and for the first time, also Applicant’s young son. (Tr. 81-82.) 
  
                                                 
3 
Applicant told an OPM investigator that he had sporadic contact with his father in approximately 1988, 
1993, and 2003. (GE 4.) At his hearing, he testified that he traveled to Israel when he was 22 and 23 to 
his father and family (grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins), which would have been between 1994 and 
1996. (Tr. 56.) He also contacted his father in 2006 to inform him of his engagement. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 5 
Financial Considerations 
 
 From January 1992 to April 2006, Applicant lived with his mother, stepfather, 
and sister #2 in a home that had been in his mother’s family for some 60 years. (GE 4; 
Tr. 59-60.) Applicant studied for his associate degree in electronics from January 1996 
to May 2000, while working as a test engineer for a safety company. (GE 1.) Applicant 
paid for his technical school with his employment income. (Tr. 61.) He studied part-time 
at a state university from January 2001 to June 2006, although he did not earn his 
bachelor’s degree. (GE 1.) 
 
Around March 2001, Applicant’s mother deeded by quitclaim the family home to 
Applicant and sister #1.4 Applicant testified that he was unaware at the time that his 
sister had persuaded their mother to give her half-ownership. (GE 4; Tr. 59.) 
 
Applicant began having financial problems around 2005. His mother’s health was 
in decline, and he was paying for some of her medical costs as well as the $1,461 
monthly mortgage payment on the home he co-owned with his sister. (GE 4; AE J.) 
Rental income from a second-floor tenancy was controlled by his sister, who gave him 
only a portion of the rent proceeds for maintenance on the home. Applicant relied on his 
personal credit to pay for necessary repairs to the house so that he and his sister could 
refinance their mortgage. (GE 4.) In May 2005, Applicant took out a personal loan of 
$5,000 to pay for a new roof. (GEs 3, 4.) 
 
In April 2005, Applicant and sister #1 refinanced the mortgage on the house 
through a new loan of $141,288, to be repaid at $1,516 monthly. (GEs 2, 3; AE J.) 
During the refinance process, the mortgage lender apparently had Applicant’s sister 
execute a quitclaim deed that increased Applicant’s ownership to 75%. (GE 4.) Around 
2006, Applicant’s sister hired a lawyer to contest Applicant’s ownership share and to 
seek rent from Applicant since he was living in the property. In turn, Applicant retained 
legal counsel to recover from his sister some of the maintenance costs on the property. 
In April 2006, Applicant moved in with his future in-laws. He had a longer commute 
when he was already struggling to pay his debts. (Tr. 28.) Also, some tenants vacated 
the home he co-owned with sister #1, and he could no longer rely on their rent to help 
pay the mortgage or maintenance on the property.5 (GE 4.)  
 
Applicant and his spouse married in October 2006. He paid for their honeymoon, 
a trip to the Caribbean, at a cost around $8,000. (Tr. 44.) A $393 medical debt had been 
placed for collection in May 2006 (SOR 2.b), but Applicant was otherwise paying his 
obligations on annual income of $52,081. (GE 3; AE C.) 
 
                                                 
4
Applicant’s maternal uncle described the house as rather large. It had six bedrooms upstairs that his 
sister (Applicant’s mother) rented out for her income. Applicant took care of the mortgage and 
maintenance on the property. Applicant’s uncle gave up his rights to the home to his sister, who wanted 
to bequeath it to her children. (Tr. 84-85.) 
 
5
Applicant apparently started receiving the rent from the home’s tenants in 2006, but he had only two 
renters in the house by that time. (Tr. 61.) 
 
 6 
Around 2007, Applicant became a defendant in a lawsuit filed by sister #1 
against him and the mortgage lender, claiming that she was coerced into executing the 
quitclaim deed. As his legal bills were mounting, Applicant had his son in August 2008. 
(GE 1; Tr. 29.) Applicant made late payments on his $5,000 loan for the roof, and after 
September 2008, he made no payments on the debt. In December 2008, the lender 
filed for a judgment to recover the $2,443 loan balance. Applicant was ordered to repay 
the debt at $25 per month. He made no payments because he did not receive any 
paperwork from the court before February 1, 2010, when he satisfied the judgment in 
full.  (GEs 3, 4; AE J.) 
 
In January 2009, Applicant’s son was placed on a special infant formula, which 
cost Applicant $10 a quart. (Tr. 29.) Then Applicant’s employer eliminated overtime. The 
loss of overtime, combined with a subsequent furlough, reduced Applicant’s income 
from $58,519 to $40,908 in 2009. (GE 4; AE C; Tr. 29.) In March 2009, he stopped 
making any payments on the mortgage for the property co-owned with sister #1. 
Foreclosure proceedings were initiated but then dismissed when he and his sister sold 
the home and paid off the mortgage. (GEs 3, 4.) Applicant received two-thirds of the 
sales proceeds. After he paid off his attorney fees, which totaled around $30,000, 
Applicant received about $7,000, which went to pay off some of his spouse’s student 
loan debt. He also covered all outstanding bills on the property, which totaled around 
$2,000. (Tr. 29-30, 37-38, 55, 88.) Applicant and his sister executed hold harmless 
agreements when the house sold, and he was dismissed as a defendant. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 In 2010, Applicant’s income increased only slightly, to $42,698. (AE C.) Applicant 
was considered an integral part of the test engineer leadership team. (AE D.) While 
Applicant’s mortgage was resolved, other debts went unpaid. In addition to the medical 
debt in SOR 2.b, a credit card lender placed a $5,915 balance for collection in February 
2010 with the assignee in SOR 2.c. In January 2011, Applicant left his employment of 
almost 15 years for his current job, which reduced his commute and increased his pay. 
(GE 1; AE C; Tr. 30.) That month, Applicant legally settled a $14,790 credit card debt for 
less than its full balance (around $7,000). (GEs 1-4.) Yet he stopped making payments 
on the MasterCard account identified in SOR 2.a. As of July 2011, his account was past 
due $419 on a $3,087 balance. In April 2011, his cable provider placed a $114 balance 
for collection (SOR 2.d). As of July 2011, Applicant owed a $9,876 collection balance on 
another credit card account (SOR 2.e). (GEs 1, 4.) 
 
 On July 7, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for a security clearance. In response to the 
financial record inquiries, he listed the $14,790 credit card debt settled for less than the 
full balance and the $2,443 judgment satisfied in February 2010. He disclosed 
outstanding past-due debt of $393 for medical emergency services (SOR 2.b) and credit 
card balances of $3,000 (SOR 2.a), $5,180 (SOR 2.c), and $9,100 (SOR 2.e).6 
                                                 
6 
The SOR lists two delinquent credit card accounts with the same lender, xxxx1806009754 and 
xxxx9250649. On his e-QIP, Applicant listed two accounts with the lender:  the account ending in 0649 
(SOR 2.e) and a Visa card account ending in 0600 placed with the assignee in SOR 2.c. Applicant’s 
credit report of August 2012 (GE 2.) shows the account in SOR 2.e with a $9,640 balance and the 
 
 7 
Applicant attributed his financial losses to the real estate litigation and sale of the 
property in a poor market, a reduction in his pay and then furlough, and the birth of his 
son, all occurring between 2005 and 2010. He added that since the end of the litigation 
and sale of the property, he has been repaying his debts. (GE 1.) 
 
 As of July 22, 2011, Applicant’s credit record showed a previously undisclosed 
$114 cable debt in collection (SOR 2.d). The reported balances of the debts on his e-
QIP totaled $19,909 (SOR 2.a-c, 2.e). (GE 3.) On August 12, 2011, Applicant was 
interviewed by an authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM). He admitted that he had ignored collection efforts and court proceedings for the 
debts in SOR 2.c and 2.e. Applicant expressed his intent to borrow funds from his 
401(k) to pay negotiated settlement balances, or the full amounts if necessary. He 
anticipated that he would satisfy the debts within 60 days. He related that he made the 
monthly minimum payments on the credit card account in SOR 2.a until early 2010. He 
had not yet responded to a letter from an attorney concerning the debt, but he intended 
to follow up with the creditor and to satisfy the debt within 60 days. Applicant had been 
unaware of the $393 medical debt before he obtained his credit record to complete his 
e-QIP. He believed his medical insurer had paid the debt. He indicated that he would 
pay the debt within 60 days if responsible to pay it. Concerning the $14,790 credit card 
debt that was settled for about $7,000 (not in SOR), Applicant indicated that the lender 
had written off the deficiency balance. Applicant did not recognize the $114 collection 
debt on his credit record. He denied any contact from the creditor or reported assignee. 
Cable service at his current residence was in his in-laws’ names. He believed he had 
paid all utility bills in full when he moved from the home he had co-owned with sister #1. 
(GE 4.) 
  
 Applicant’s earned wages with his new employer totaled $72,524 in 2011. (AE 
C.) As of August 16, 2012, Applicant’s credit record showed no progress on resolving 
the delinquent debt balances identified in SOR 2.a ($3,087), 2.c ($7,061), 2.d ($114), 
and 2.e ($9,640). However, it also showed no new debt. (GE 2.) Applicant helped his 
spouse pay some of her outstanding debt. His in-laws, who are self-employed, needed 
financial assistance as well.7 Around August 2011, Applicant began contributing $700 to 
$800 a month to the household expenses. Every month, he also pays between $300 to 
$400 for groceries, $250 for phone service, $100 for insurance, and $100 on his 
spouse’s remaining student loan debt of $8,000. In addition to unspecified gasoline and 
medical prescription costs, Applicant was paying $30 per office visit for his spouse, who 
was seeing her physician twice a month during her high-risk pregnancy. He and his 
spouse had been paying $9,000 a year for the past two years for their son to attend 
private school, although they enrolled him in public school starting September 2013. 
                                                                                                                                                             
account in SOR 2.c in collection with the assignee with a $7,061 balance. The account allegedly ending in 
9754 is the same account as the VISA account on the e-QIP as 0600.  
 
7
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a realtor and his father-in-law is an ophthalmologist. (Tr. 65.) Applicant did 
not document his in-laws’ financial need. At the same time, Applicant reasonably can be expected to 
contribute to the household expenses since he is not paying rent. 
  
 
 8 
Applicant’s spouse works as a part-time language teacher. Her gross annual income is 
$10,000 to $12,000. (Tr. 45-50, 55, 62.) 
 
 In October 2012, Applicant was approved for a $30,000 loan from his 401(k). He 
wanted enough to cover his debts and planned to deposit the rest back into his 401(k) 
to lower his monthly repayment, which is currently $400 a month. (Tr. 51-52.) A year 
earlier, a financial advisor advised him against borrowing from his 401(k) to address his 
remaining debts, but Applicant was unable to obtain a personal loan. (Tr. 50-51, 53.) It 
took some time for Applicant to convince his spouse that he should borrow from his 
401(k). On October 31, 2012, Applicant paid around $8,000 to satisfy the judgment for 
the debt in SOR 2.e. (AEs B, F; Tr. 65.) 
 
 On January 9, 2013, Applicant paid $4,650 to settle a $7,000 debt.8 (AE A.) The 
following day, he paid $2,242.41 in full settlement of the debt in SOR 2.a. (AEs F, G.) 
As of January 24, 2013, Applicant expected to have his remaining debt paid off by the 
end of February 2013. (Tr. 30.) On February 1, 2013, Applicant satisfied the $114.38 
debt in SOR 2.d. (AE I.) On February 12, 2013, he paid the $393 medical debt (SOR 
2.b). (AEs F, H.) 
 
 Applicant does not have any open credit card accounts. He is not behind on his 
monthly bills. (Tr. 57.) His latest tax refund was for $300 or $400. (Tr. 58.) In April 2012, 
Applicant received a performance-based raise at work to bring his annual salary to 
$88,000. (Tr. 58, 75.) His direct supervisor has found him to be a “dedicated and diligent 
team member and a model employee.” Also, Applicant has consistently been honest 
and straightforward with his supervisor. (AE E; Tr. 68-69, 71.) Applicant has 
appropriately handled information marked not for foreign dissemination. (Tr. 73.) 
Applicant willingly works overtime without compensation. (Tr. 71, 76.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
After reviewing U.S. government publications concerning Israel and its relations 
with the United States, I take administrative notice of the following facts:9 
                                                 
8
AE A shows a payment of $4,650 on January 9, 2013, which was submitted as evidence of settlement of 
a debt. (Tr. 30, 65.) After his hearing, Applicant indicated that the payment was to settle an account with 
the lender identified in SOR 2.c, but on an account not listed in the SOR. (AE F.) Applicant’s credit report 
of July 2011 (GE 3.) lists three accounts that had been opened with the same credit card lender. In 
addition to the debts in SOR 2.c and 2.e, which were reportedly in collection, Applicant had opened a 
credit card account xxxx49221179 in May 2002, which he paid on time and had a zero balance as of 
November 2004. The assignee for the debt paid in January 2013 lists a routing number similar to 
(22117xxxx) but not fully matching the account number. The evidence is inconclusive about whether 
Applicant had a third account with the credit card lender which fell delinquent in recent years or which 
debt was settled with the $4,650 payment. Applicant presented evidence showing that he was paying on 
a credit card debt that his spouse had with the lender as of May 2011. (AE K.) 
 
9
The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on Israel 
quoted in this decision: the U.S. Department of State’s Country Specific Information:  Israel, the West 
Bank and Gaza, August 9, 2012; excerpts from the National Counterintelligence Center’s, Annual Report 
to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage—2000 and Annual Report to 
 
 9 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy of about 7.76 million people with a modern 
economy. Despite the instability and armed conflict that have marked Israel’s relations 
within the region since it came into existence, Israel has developed a diversified, 
technologically advanced market economy focused on high-technology electronic and 
biomedical equipment, chemicals, and transport equipment. 
 
Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan Heights, and East Jerusalem 
as a result of the 1967 war. In 1994, the Palestinian Authority was established in the 
Gaza Strip and West Bank, although the Islamic Resistance Movement (HAMAS), a 
U.S. designated foreign terrorist organization (FTO), took control of the Gaza Strip in 
June 2007. U.S. citizens, including tourists, students, residents, and U.S. government 
personnel, have been injured or killed by terrorists while in Israel, the West Bank, and 
Gaza. Foreigners have been kidnapped by armed gunmen in Gaza and the West Bank. 
All persons applying for entry to Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to security 
and police record checks by the Israeli government and may be denied entry or exit 
without explanation. The Israeli government considers U.S. citizens who also hold 
Israeli citizenship or have a claim to dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration 
and other legal purposes. U.S. citizen visitors have been subjected to questioning and 
thorough searches by Israeli authorities on entry or departure. Israeli authorities have 
denied access to some U.S. citizens to U.S. consular officers, lawyers, and family 
members during temporary detention. 
 
The United States and Israel have a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. The United States was the 
first country to officially recognize Israel, only eleven minutes after Israel declared its 
independence in 1948. In 1985, Israel and the United States concluded a Free Trade 
Agreement designed to strengthen economic ties by eliminating tariffs. The United 
States is Israel’s largest single trading partner. Other than Afghanistan, Israel is the 
leading recipient of U.S. foreign aid and is a frequent purchaser of major U.S. weapons 
systems. 
  
Israel and the United States do not have a mutual defense agreement, although 
the United States remains committed to Israel’s security and well-being, predicated on 
Israel maintaining a “qualitative military edge” over other countries in its region. The 
United States is the principal international proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace process, 
and has been actively involved in negotiating an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In 
May 2011, the Obama Administration called for renewed Israeli-Palestinian negotiations 
focusing on the issues of borders and security parameters. Recent political upheavals 
and transitions in surrounding Arab countries, such as Egypt and Syria, have recently 
called into question the land-for-peace formula that has guided the efforts to resolve the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Israel perceives threats from Iran and Iranian-sponsored 
                                                                                                                                                             
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage—2005; the Interagency OPSEC 
Support Staff’s Intelligence Threat Handbook, June 2004; the Congressional Research Service’s Israel:  
Background and U.S. Relations, February 29, 2012; and several press releases from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security. 
 
 10 
non-state actors, such as the Lebanese Shiite group Hezbollah, as well as Hamas and 
other Sunni Islamist Palestinian militants in Gaza. Israeli concerns about a nuclear-
weapons-capable Iran led to increased calls for international action against Iran’s 
nuclear program in 2011. Demographic trends in Israel have led to the emergence of 
nationalistic and conservative elements, more hawkish on foreign policy and security. 
 
Strong U.S. congressional support for Israel has resulted in the country receiving 
preferential treatment in bidding for U.S. defense contracts and access to expanded 
weapons systems at lower prices. In 1988, Israel was designated a “major non-NATO 
ally.” U.S. bilateral aid to Israel is in the form of foreign military financing (FMF). Under a 
10-year bilateral memorandum of understanding, the United States is committed to $3.1 
billion in FMF annually to Israel from fiscal years 2013 to 2018, subject to continuing 
congressional appropriations. Israel and the United States are partners in the “Star 
Wars” missile defense project, and have concluded numerous treaties and agreements 
aimed at strengthening military ties, including agreements on mutual defense 
assistance, procurement, and security of information. Israel and the United States have 
established joint groups to further military cooperation. The two countries participate in 
joint military exercises and collaborate on military research and weapons development.  
  
The transfer by sale of U.S. defense articles or services to Israel and all other 
foreign countries is subject to the Arms Export Control Act and implementing regulations 
as well as the 1952 Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between the United States 
and Israel. The United States has acted to restrict aid and/or rebuked Israel in the past 
for possible improper use of U.S.-supplied military equipment. The United States is 
concerned about Israeli settlements; Israel’s sales of sensitive security equipment and 
technology, especially to China; Israel’s inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual 
property; Israel’s suspected use of U.S.-made cluster bombs against civilian populated 
areas in Lebanon; and espionage-related cases implicating Israeli officials. Israeli 
military officials have been implicated in economic espionage activity in the United 
States. U.S. government employees and U.S. government contractors have been 
implicated in providing classified and sensitive information to Israel. Israel was listed as 
one of the nations that aggressively targeted U.S. economic intelligence as recently as 
2000. Israel was not named specifically in the National Counterintelligence Executive’s 
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage—
2005, although it was noted that, as in years past, entities from a small number of 
countries accounted for the foreign targeting of U.S. technologies in fiscal year 2005. In 
March 2005, a U.S. company pleaded guilty to exporting digital oscilloscopes to Israel 
without a license. The items were reportedly capable of being utilized in the 
development of weapons of mass destruction and in missile delivery fields. In 2009, a 
U.S. government employee pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to act as an 
unregistered agent of Israel. He was indicted on suspicion of giving Israel classified 
documents concerning nuclear weapons, F-15 fighter jets, and the Patriot air-missile 
defense system to Israel between 1979 and 1985. In March 2011, a U.S. company 
agreed to pay a civil penalty to settle allegations that it violated Export Administration 
Regulations related to the export of titanium alloy and aluminum bar to China between 
 
 11 
April 2004 and August 2007, and to Israel in July 2007, without the required export 
licenses. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 12 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s father, stepmother, half-brother, and half-sister are resident citizens 
of Israel. Applicant’s sister #1 is a dual citizen of the United States, where she lives with 
her spouse and children, and of Israel, where she was born. AG ¶ 7(a) is implicated if 
contacts create a heightened risk of foreign influence: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of the family 
ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. Even friendly nations may have interests that are not completely aligned with 
the United States. As noted by the DOHA Appeal Board, “the United States has a 
compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any 
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States. ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or dependent on, the 
foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign government, the 
administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the country at issue. 
See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 13 
Despite good relations between the two countries and the U.S.’ commitment to 
Israel’s continued existence as a nation and its security, Israel has been implicated in 
espionage against the United States in the past. Israel has been targeted by terrorists 
for much of its existence. After his parents’ divorce, Applicant had some contact, albeit 
not on a regular basis, with his father and father’s family in Israel. Applicant traveled to 
Israel when he was ages 22 and 23 to see these relatives. He also had in-person 
contact when they came to the United States for a visit in 1999. However, Applicant has 
had no contact with his father or half-brother since 2006, when he called his father to 
inform him of his engagement. He invited his father and half-brother to attend his 
wedding in the United States, although he cannot confirm whether the invitations were 
received. (Tr. 35.) Applicant has not seen his stepmother since 1999, and he 
maintained no contact with her. During his August 2011 interview, Applicant told the 
OPM investigator that he was in contact with his half-sister in Israel once every two 
years by telephone until about 2008. However, he denied any ongoing contact with her 
as well, as she too became sympathetic to sister #1 in her litigation against him. Issues 
over the home that Applicant and sister #1 co-owned in the United States also led to the 
termination of any contact with sister #2 in the United States. He has no present 
contacts that raise a heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information,” focuses on the relationships that might 
pose a heightened risk. Applicant invited his father and half-siblings to his wedding in 
2006, even as his relations with these Israeli family members were deteriorating 
because of the real estate dispute with sister #1 in the United States. He gave them an 
opportunity to prove that they still wanted to be part of his life, and they made it clear to 
him that they did not by not coming to the wedding. Applicant wants nothing to do with 
sister #1, who filed the lawsuit against him. With his mother now deceased, and even 
sister #2 no longer in his life, Applicant does not have connections, either direct or 
through other family members, to Israel that could conflict with his obligation to protect 
sensitive information. 
 
To the extent that Applicant’s past contacts and bonds of affection or obligation 
with Israeli citizens raise some security concern under AG ¶ 7(a) or AG ¶ 7(b), two 
mitigating conditions apply under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
 14 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
With the exception of his maternal uncle, Applicant has been estranged from his 
family since 2006, if not before then, when he was forced to move out of the home that 
he had shared with his mother since 1991 and co-owned with sister #1 since March 
2001. According to Applicant’s uncle, Applicant’s mother refused to see Applicant or his 
new son in the last few years of her life. Only on her deathbed did she relent. 
 
In contrast to the strained relations with his paternal relatives and his siblings, 
Applicant has close bonds to his spouse, son, and his spouse’s parents, as well as to 
his maternal uncle, who are U.S. resident citizens. In return for living rent-free in his 
parents-in-law’s home, Applicant gives them between $700 and $800 a month for 
household expenses. Applicant has no personal ties of citizenship or loyalty to Israel. 
He has worked as a test engineer only in the United States, and his income is solely 
from U.S. sources. He has no financial assets or business interests in Israel. Not only 
are his loyalties to Israeli citizens minimal, but his relationships in the United States are 
sufficiently deep and longstanding to where Applicant can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
Guideline F—Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant satisfied a delinquent court judgment of $2,443 in February 2010 and 
settled a $14,790 credit card debt for less than its full balance in January 2011. As of 
July 2011, Applicant still owed past-due debt totaling $20,023. He was unaware only of 
the $393 medical debt and the $114 cable debt before he applied for his security 
clearance. Potentially disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” are 
established. 
 
Except for the $393 medical debt, which was placed for collection in 2006, the 
debts became past due in 2008 or later. It is difficult to apply mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
 
 15 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” to such recent collection 
balances. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” is implicated because his finances were 
negatively impacted by circumstances outside of his control. Applicant’s sister #1 
retained tenant income that he needed to cover maintenance on the home they co-
owned, so he had to rely on personal credit to pay for its upkeep. He also covered some 
healthcare costs for his mother, although he did not provide the details about those 
expenses. In 2007, Applicant’s sister filed a lawsuit against him, which led to him 
incurring some $30,000 in unbudgeted legal fees. In the fall of 2008, Applicant’s infant 
son was placed on a special formula that cost Applicant $10 a quart. Then, in 2009 his 
salary declined by 30% ($58,519 to $40,908) because of a loss of overtime and a 
furlough. His salary increased only slightly, to $42,698, in 2010. However, AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not mitigate the delay in addressing his debts. In late January 2011, he began 
working for his current employer at a significantly higher salary. Despite annual wages 
totaling $72,524, he made no payments on the debts in the SOR. Instead, he paid 
$9,000 for private schooling for his young son in 2011 and 2012. While it is 
understandable that Applicant and his spouse want the best for their son, the 
expenditure is difficult to justify when creditors were not being paid. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts,” has some applicability. In February 2010, Applicant 
satisfied a $2,448 judgment against him, and in January 2011, he settled a large credit 
card debt. While neither of these delinquent accounts were alleged in the SOR, they are 
relevant in that they indicate some effort on his part to pay his debts before the SOR 
was issued. Applicant’s case for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is undermined somewhat 
by his lack of urgency in addressing the debts in the SOR. He told an OPM investigator 
in August 2011 that he intended to withdraw funds from his retirement fund to pay the 
past-due credit card accounts identified in SOR 2.a, 2.c, and 2.e. He expressed his 
intent to settle the debts within the next 60 days. He made no payments on the debts 
over the next year. On October 31, 2012, he paid the judgment debt to satisfy SOR 2.e. 
On January 10, 2013, he settled the debt in SOR 2.a. He did not pay the $393 medical 
debt (SOR 2.b) or the $114 cable debt (SOR 2.d) until February 2013. Instead, 
Applicant focused on paying some of his spouse’s debts, such as the credit card debt 
documented in AE K. On January 9, 2013, he settled another debt that was apparently 
not listed in the SOR. (AE A.) 
 
Available credit information does not show that the debt in SOR 2.c has been 
satisfied. Applicant’s February 2013 credit report shows the debt was charged off by the 
credit lender in February 2010 and sold. The assignee was reporting a past-due 
balance of $7,257 as of January 2013. AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,” does not require that all debts be paid. However, 
 
 16 
there must be clear indications that the financial problems are not likely to persist. Of 
the $30,000 borrowed from his 401(k) to satisfy his debts, Applicant has about half of 
the funds left to pay off his remaining delinquency. His documented satisfaction of the 
other accounts leaves me to believe that the debt in SOR 2.c will soon be resolved, if it 
has not already been paid. His present salary is sufficient to cover the $400 monthly 
payments on the loan from his 401(k), and he has incurred no new delinquent debts. 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).10 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were confined to the 2007 to 2010 time frame 
when he was dealing with several stressful family circumstances (sister #1’s lawsuit and 
estrangement of family members, sale of the family home to avert foreclosure, birth of 
his son who had special needs, and loss of 30% of his income). These situations have 
been resolved through legal means, and with his present income, he has stabilized his 
finances. Applicant and his spouse have enrolled their son in a public school for the 
next school year in an effort to improve their financial situation. Even if Applicant should 
reestablish cordial relations with his foreign relatives, he can be counted on to act 
consistent with U.S. interests.  He has demonstrated reliability and trustworthiness in his 
employment with the defense contractor. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
                                                 
10
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
 17 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.c:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.d:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
