KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline B; Guideline K 
DIGEST: An SOR is an administrative pleading that is not held to the strict requirements of a
criminal indictment.  It is sufficient if the SOR puts an applicant on notice of the security
concerns alleged against him.  We will not interpret the Directive in such a way as to render any
provision meaningless.  Paragraph E3.1.22 does not provide a right of cross-examination
regarding out-of-hearing statements that are admissible under other provisions of the Directive. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-12461.a1
DATE: 03/14/2013
DATE: March 14, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-12461
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 25, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline B (Foreign
Influence), and Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 27,
2012, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
2
Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the Judge erred in one of his evidentiary rulings; whether the Judge erred in his findings of
fact; and whether the Decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable
findings under Guidelines B and K, and under three of the four Guideline E allegations, are not at
issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
 The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues on appeal: Applicant worked
for a contractor in Country A.  During that time, he was friendly with a member of the military
reserves of the U.S.  She held a security clearance, both because of her military status and her
civilian job with the U.S. Government.  In 2009, the friend was on temporary duty in Country A.
Applicant and she went to dinner one evening.  Applicant advised her that two persons from Syria
would meet them.  One of these persons worked for the Syrian government.  In response to a
question from Applicant, the friend told him she would probably report the meeting with the Syrians
to appropriate security authorities.  After the Syrians arrived, the group engaged in talk of a social
nature, and the friend was not asked sensitive questions.  After the evening concluded, Applicant
again asked if she was going to report the foreign contact, and she stated that she probably would.
Applicant asked her if she could at least not mention his name when she made her report.   
Subsequently, the friend reported the contact to pertinent security authorities.  She advised
that Applicant had introduced the Syrians to her.  She identified the two Syrian nationals from
pictures on Applicant’s social networking site.  U.S. officials identified one of the persons as a low-
level official of the Syrian government.  They could not identify the other person.  
Applicant admitted to facts supporting most of the findings above, though he denied having
asked the friend not to mention his name.  The Judge stated that he did not find Applicant’s
testimony credible.  He found that the conversation took place as the friend had described it.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant’s request to be left out of the friend’s report was something
he had no right to do.  He concluded that, at a minimum, it was an attempt to convince the friend to
decline completely to fulfill what she believed to be her duty in reporting a possible security
incident.  He concluded that Applicant showed questionable judgment, creating thereby a possibility
that he could be subject to exploitation, manipulation, and duress.  In considering Applicant’s case
for mitigation, the Judge stated that he found Applicant to be evasive and less than forthcoming.
He stated that Applicant’s lack of complete candor rendered the Judge unable to conclude that
Applicant had met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge
stated that Applicant had not accepted responsibility for his security-significant conduct, leaving the
Judge with unresolved doubt about his fitness for a clearance.  
1“A written or oral statement adverse to the applicant on a controverted issue may be received and considered
by the Administrative Judge without affording an opportunity to cross-examine the person making the statement orally,
or in writing when justified by circumstances, only in either of the following circumstances . . .”  The excepted
circumstances are not germane to the case under consideration.  
3
Discussion
Denial of Due Process Issue
Applicant contends that he was denied due process.  Specifically, he contends that the
allegation in the SOR was vague, thereby impairing his ability to prepare for the hearing.  An SOR
is an administrative pleading that is not held to the strict requirements of a criminal indictment.
Neither does it have to allege every relevant fact that might arise at the hearing.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 08-06859 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2010).  In this case, the sole allegation that the Judge
found against Applicant read as follows: 
In approximately June 2009, you introduced a United States military member to two
Syrian nationals associated with the [Syrian government in Country A] and
subsequently asked the military member not to disclose your association with said
Syrian nationals to anyone inside the United States [G]overnment.  SOR ¶ 1(a).
The SOR identified both the nature of the Syrians’ government employment and the name of
Country A.  This allegation was sufficient to place Applicant on notice of the security concern
alleged against him and the factual basis thereof.  Given the extensive nature of Applicant’s
documentary evidence, including documents addressing the substance of the allegation at issue here,
there is no reason to believe that he was impaired in his ability to prepare for the hearing.
Furthermore, Applicant’s Answer to the SOR made no claim of vagueness.  His response to the
allegation was simply “I deny.”  Applicant has failed to demonstrate that he was denied the due
process afforded by the Directive.
Evidentiary Ruling
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in admitting a Government exhibit consisting of a
signed statement in the form of a letter, thereby denying him his right to cross-examination secured
by Directive ¶ E3.1.22.1  We evaluate a Judge’s evidentiary rulings to see if they are arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-01400 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 3, 2013).  
2See Udall, Secretary of the Interior, v. Tallman, 380 U.S. 1 (1965): “When faced with a problem of statutory
construction, this Court shows great deference to the interpretation given the statute by the officers or agency charged
with its administration . . . When the construction of an administrative regulation rather than a statute is in issue,
deference is even more clearly in order.”  
4
The challenged statement is a letter from the Naval Criminal Investigative Service to the
Defense Security Service, apprising the recipient of an ongoing criminal investigation of Applicant.
The investigation was in response to the report by Applicant’s friend of their contact with the Syrian
nationals.  The document states in pertinent part “[Applicant] subsequently asked the . . . reservist
not to report his association with the Syrian nationals to anyone inside of the U.S. [G]overnment.”
Government Exhibit (GE) 4, Status of NCIS Investigation of [Applicant], July 20, 2011.  Citing ¶
E3.1.22, Applicant argues that the Judge should not have admitted this document without affording
him a right to cross examine the person who made it.
We have previously addressed the significance of ¶ E3.1.22, concluding that its right of cross
examination is not greater than the confrontation right enjoyed by a criminal defendant, or even co-
extensive with it.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 2004).  Even in a
criminal case, out-of-court statements are often admitted under the exceptions to the hearsay
prohibition set forth in the Federal Rules of Evidence.  In administrative proceedings, hearsay is
admissible and can constitute substantial evidence.  See, e.g., Crawford v. Dept. of Agriculture, 50
F. 3d 46, 49 (D.C. Cir. 1995); Bustos-Torres v. INS, 898 F.2d 1053, 1056 (5th Cir. 1990); Willingham
v. Gonzales, 391 F. Supp. 2d 52, 64 (Dist. Ct. D.C., 2005), quoting Hoska v. Army, 677 F.2d 131,
138 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  DOHA proceedings are administrative and civil in nature, and they are not
conducted with a strict application of evidentiary rules required in criminal cases, although DOHA
relies upon the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) as a guide in its hearings.  Directive ¶ E3.1.19. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-06770 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2004). 
To interpret ¶ E3.1.22 as Applicant argues would impose a right of cross-examination as a
condition of admitting otherwise admissible hearsay evidence on controverted matters.  That would
render other paragraphs of the Directive meaningless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-01009 at 7 (App.
Bd. Mar. 29, 2005) (“The Board will not interpret or construe the Directive or the Adjudicative
Guidelines in a manner that results in rendering any provision superfluous or meaningless”).
(Moreover, this would pose an unreasonably severe impediment to the accomplishment of DOHA’s
mission, especially in view of the fact that the agency does not have authority to subpoena witnesses
to appear before its hearings.)  Accordingly, we have consistently held that ¶ E3.1.22 does not
provide a right of cross examination concerning out-of-hearing statements that are admissible under
other provisions of the Directive.2  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2009).
One such provision is Directive ¶ E3.1.19, supra, with the FRE’s panoply of hearsay exceptions.
Another is Directive ¶ E3.1.20, which states:   
[o]fficial records or evidence compiled or created in the regular course of business,
other than DoD personnel background reports of investigation (ROI), may be
3We also note that, at the end of the hearing, the Judge gave Applicant an opportunity to call the friend as a
witness, either in person or over the telephone, in order to address the circumstances at issue in this case.  He provided
Applicant extra time after the hearing to decide if he wished to take advantage of this opportunity.  Applicant did not
desire to do so.  Decision at 2; Tr. at 139.    
5
received and considered by the Administrative Judge without authenticating
witnesses, provided that such information has been furnished by an investigative
agency pursuant to its responsibilities in connection with assisting the Secretary of
Defense, or the Department or Agency head concerned, to safeguard classified
information . . . 
 We have cited this paragraph in admitting a variety of documents,  including police reports,
criminal investigation reports by the military services, Defense Investigative Service facility
inspection reports, and Clearance Decision Statements.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06997  at 3
(App. Bd. Mar 1, 2011).  In the case under consideration here, the document in question possesses
all the indica of having been compiled in the regular course of official NCIS operations.  Prepared
on NCIS letterhead stationary, it relates matters that fall within the purview of a DoD criminal
investigating agency and which are appropriate for reporting to the DoD agency charged with
overseeing contractor security matters.  It does not appear to have been generated merely in
anticipation of a DOHA hearing.  There is nothing in the record to suggest that this document
exceeded the scope of NCIS authority, and Federal officials are entitled to a presumption of good
faith in the conduct of their duties.  See, e.g., ISCR Case no. 11-05079 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2012).
Accordingly, this document is an official record within the meaning of the Directive.  
Moreover, it is not a report of a background investigation but, rather, of a criminal
investigation into possible counter-intelligence activity by Applicant.  Accordingly, it was legitimate
for the Judge to admit it without an authenticating witness.  In light of the record as a whole, the
Judge’s decision to admit this document was not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  To the
extent that Applicant has raised a due process concern in making his argument on this issue, we
resolve it adversely to him.3
Error in Factual Finding Issue
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he requested the friend not to mention his name
in her report.  We examine a Judge’s findings to determine if they are supported by substantial
record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-02311 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2012).  In this case we
have considered GE 4, discussed above.  We have also considered Applicant Exhibit (AE) 11, which
is a detailed summary by the NCIS of the friend’s statement to them of the circumstances underlying
Applicant’s request to her.  This document describes in detail the friend’s association with Applicant
and the events of the evening in question.  Specifically, it describes the friend as advising that, at
the close of the evening, Applicant asked whether she was going to report the contact.  When told
that she probably would, Applicant “asked that she at least not mention his name.”  GE 4 and AE
11, taken together, constitute substantial evidence of the challenged finding, especially in light of
6
the Judge’s credibility determination (See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1: “[T]he Appeal Board shall give
deference to the credibility determinations of the Administrative Judge”).  
In regard to the unfavorable Formal Finding regarding SOR ¶ 1(a), we find no error in the
Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions or the whole-person factors.  The record supports a
conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
