1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-14079
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns generated by his relatives who
are citizens of Afghanistan living in Iran. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On August 22, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2011, admitting all of the
allegations except subparagraph 1.a, and requesting a decision on the record. On
October 19, 2012, the case was converted to a hearing at Department Counsel’s
request. On December 4, 2012, I received the case assignment. DOHA issued a notice
2
of hearing on January 11, 2013, scheduling it for January 31, 2013. I held the hearing as
scheduled. During the hearing, I received two Government exhibits, marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and Applicant’s testimony. At the Government’s
request, I took administrative notice of the adjudicative facts set forth in 18 documents,
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I to VII, IX to XIV, and XVI to XX. (Tr. 20-21)  I denied
the Government’s request to take administrative notice of adjudicative facts listed in two
exhibits marked HE VIII and HE XV. 
At the end of the hearing, Applicant moved to leave the record open to allow him
to submit additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not object, and I granted the
motion. Within the time allotted, Applicant submitted 15 exhibits that I received as
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through O. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on
February 15, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old married man with two children, ages 18 and 16. He was
born and raised in Afghanistan. He earned an undergraduate degree in 1982 from a
college in Afghanistan, majoring in English. (AE O) After finishing college, he fled the
violence and instability in Afghanistan and immigrated to Iran. (Tr. 32) He lived in Iran
from approximately 1982 to 1988. Through a United Nations program that assists
refugees, Applicant then immigrated to Italy in 1989. Later that year, he immigrated to
the United States. (Tr. 29) He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1994. 
Applicant visited Iran in 1991 to get married. His wife then immigrated to the
United States. She is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. Both of their children were born and
raised in the United States. Applicant’s mother is originally from Afghanistan. She lives
with him. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2012. (Answer at 2) 
Applicant is currently working as a tailor in a department store. According to
Applicant’s supervisor, “he is a very dedicated, hardworking employee, respected by
both the team he manages and the peers he serves.” (AE D)  From May 2011 to October
2011, he worked as a translator in Afghanistan. (Tr. 52) He is seeking to return to
Afghanistan in another translator position. 
Applicant has one sister who lives in Sweden, and three sisters and two brothers
who reside in Iran. Also, he has one sister-in-law and two brothers-in-law who are
Afghan citizens that live in Iran. Applicant’s family emigrated from Afghanistan “for the
sake of their lives and for the safety of their families.” (Answer at 2) Like many Afghan
refugees, Applicant’s family found a safe haven in Iran, a country with a similar religion,
culture, and language. (Tr. 54)
Applicant’s sister, now living in Sweden, moved from Afghanistan to Iran in 2010
after her husband was killed in sectarian fighting. She immigrated to Sweden
approximately later that year through a U.N. program that assists “widowed refugees.”
(GE 2) Applicant has spoken to her twice since she moved to Sweden. (GE 2 at 1)
3
One of Applicant’s sister’s (S1) living in Iran is a homemaker. She is married to a
pediatrician. S2 is homemaker. She is also married to a doctor. Applicant talks to S1 and
S2 approximately 6 to 12 times per year. (GE 2 at 2; Tr. 38-40) S3 is a homemaker. Her
husband is a day laborer. Applicant talks to her approximately once per year. (GE 2 at 2)
One of Applicant’s brothers living in Iran recently experienced a stroke and is disabled.
(Tr. 38) His wife is a homemaker. Applicant’s other brother who lives in Iran is a day
laborer. Applicant talks to this brother approximately twice per year. Applicant last visited
his family in Iran in July 2009 to attend his sister’s funeral (S4). (Tr. 44; GE 1 at 25)
Iran is a brutally repressive theocracy that is virulently anti-American. It seeks to
dominate the Middle East through sponsoring terrorism, fomenting unrest in other
countries, and developing weapons of mass destruction. (see generally, administrative
notice documents) The United States has not had diplomatic or consular relations with
Iran since November 1979 when militant Iranian students occupied the U.S. Embassy
and held 52 Americans hostage for 444 days. (HE I) Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism.
(He III) Iran’s government employs draconian methods such as  torture, rape, flogging,
and amputations of dissenters to instill fear and retain power. (HE V) Since 2007, several
U.S. citizens have been detained by the Iranian government and held without consular
access. (HE XVIII)
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
ISCR Case No. 02-04786 at 5 (App. Bd. June 27, 2003).1
4
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest” (AG
¶ 6). Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of
the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including,
but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism” (Id.).
Applicant’s mother is now a naturalized U.S. citizen, and she lives in the United
States with Applicant’s family. I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.a for Applicant. Although
parts of Afghanistan remain violent and chaotic, there is minimal evidence that its various
warlords, militias, or terrorists have been targeting, or have the capacity to target,
specific  Afghan citizens living in distant countries, such as Applicant’s sister living in
Sweden, as referenced in subparagraph 1.d. I resolve subparagraph 1.d in Applicant’s
favor. 
The Iranian regime is both intensely authoritarian and hostile to the United States.
Although friendly countries can engage in activities involving coercion, persuasion or
duress of an individual to gather classified information as readily as hostile countries, the
risk of such activity is heightened with hostile countries because such countries are “not
likely to have scruples” about pressuring one of their citizens or residents to obtain
classified information.  Consequently, Applicant’s contacts with his relatives who are1
Iranian residents trigger the application of AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
a resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for 23 years. He is well-respected on his
job, and performed admirably in his previous stint as a translator in Afghanistan. These
attributes, however, are unable to overcome the heavy burden that applicants who have
relatives living in hostile countries such as Iran must overcome.  Neither AG ¶ 8(a), “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.,” nor AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
5
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest,” apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
After escaping violence and persecution in Afghanistan, Applicant’s relatives
found safe haven in Iran, a country with a similar language, religion, and culture.
However accommodating the country of Iran may have been to Afghan refugees, it has
been, and remains intensely hostile to the United States. Under these circumstances,
Applicant’s relatives residing in Iran generate a burden that is simply too great for
Applicant to overcome. Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence security
concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                          
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
