 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-15022 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas and Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Murray, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant immigrated the United States in 1998, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2002. She does not have strong family ties or substantial property interests in 
Iran. Her family members in Iran do not subject her to a risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. She has established deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the United States, and she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. Foreign influence and foreign preference concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility to hold a position of public trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for a public trust position 
(Application) on September 4, 2010. On August 20, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under 
Guideline B (foreign influence), and Guideline C (foreign preference).1 Applicant 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
answered the SOR on September 21, 2012, and requested a decision without a 
hearing. The Government requested a hearing before an administrative judge on 
October 5, 2012. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2012. 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 19, 2012, scheduling a hearing for December 10, 2012. On November 29, 
2012, Applicant’s counsel entered his appearance and requested a postponement, 
which I granted. An amended notice of hearing was issued on December 5, 2012, 
scheduling a hearing for January 8, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, 
and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 6. GEs 1 and 2 and AEs 2 through 6 were 
admitted without objection. GE 3 and AE 1 were marked for identification and admitted 
for administrative notice purposes. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 16, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 2.a, and 
2.b, with explanations. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, she admitted that her husband is a 
citizen of the United States and Iran, but denied that he is a citizen of Australia. 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.d, she admitted her mother is a citizen of Australia and Iran, but 
denied that she is a resident of Iran. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered her testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She and her 
husband were born and raised in Iran. After graduating from high school (around 1982, 
at age 18), Applicant followed her older sister into Europe, where she lived with relatives 
for approximately 18 months. Applicant explained that after the 1979 Iranian revolution, 
she and her family had little opportunity for jobs, education, and to prosper in Iran 
because they were non-Muslims. Applicant, her family, and her husband are practicing 
Zoroastrians. In 1984 (age 20), she emigrated to Australia seeking better opportunities. 
Applicant became a naturalized Australian citizen, received an Australian passport, and 
lived there until 1998. She attended college in Australia and received a postgraduate 
diploma in management (two year degree). 
 
Applicant’s husband travelled to the United States in 1977-1978, seeking an 
advanced college degree. He was 26 years old when he left Iran. After the 1979 Iranian 
revolution, his scholarship was cancelled, and he did not return to Iran. He remained in 
the United States, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1998. Applicant met her 
husband while she was living in Australia. They were married in 1998, and she 
emigrated to the United States that same year with her husband. They decided to make 
                                                                                                                                            
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
their home in the United States because of the better opportunities available. Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. 
 
From 1998 until May 2009, Applicant worked for a contractor providing services 
to U.S. government agencies. Applicant testified that she held public trust positions with 
two government agencies for many years. She started working for her current employer, 
a government contractor, in May 2009. There is no evidence that she ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified or sensitive information. Nor is 
there any evidence of trustworthiness concerns or issues concerning her ability to 
protect sensitive information. Applicant’s husband has several advanced education 
degrees from U.S. universities, including a doctorate degree in electrical engineering. 
He worked as a university professor for several U.S. universities, as an examiner for a 
government agency, and currently he works as a quality assurance lead for a contractor 
servicing a government agency. 
 
Applicant’s husband has three siblings who are residents and citizens of Iran, 
with whom he maintains infrequent contact. His brother works for a private company in 
Iran. His older sister is retired, and she is divorced with two children. The other sister is 
a homemaker, and she has four children. Applicant’s husband testified that his family 
members are also practicing Zoroastrians. They are not allowed to serve in the Iranian 
military services, and are not connected in any way to the Iranian government. Applicant 
has contact with her siblings-in-law approximately three to four times a year, mostly 
during special occasions. 
 
Applicant has two daughters born in the United States, ages 12 and 10. She and 
her husband own a home in the United States with an estimated value of $1.5 million, 
owing a mortgage of around $400,000. Both she and her husband have 401(k) 
retirement plans with a value of around $300,000 each. Applicant and her husband do 
not own any property or financial interest in Iran. They have a bank account with a value 
of around $60,000 in Australia, as well as retirement plans they earned while working in 
that country, with a value of around $20,000 to $30,000. 
 
Applicant’s father died in Iran in 2001. She claimed that the only relatives she 
has living in Iran are an uncle and one cousin from her father’s side. The last time she 
had contact with her father’s relatives was in 2007-2008. Applicant’s mother, 82, and 
her sister emigrated to Australia in 2008. Both are now naturalized citizens and 
residents of Australia. Applicant’s mother visited Iran in 2011. Applicant believes that 
because of her mother’s age (82), it is very unlikely that her mother will ever travel to 
Iran again. 
 
Applicant has extended family members (aunts, uncles, and numerous cousins) 
that live in Australia, Germany, and the United States. Many of them are dual citizens of 
Iran and their country of residency. In 2007, Applicant travelled to Germany to visit with 
her relatives in that country. 
 
Since 1998, Applicant travelled to Iran on four occasions. She visited her 
husband’s family in Iran in 1999, after their wedding. In 2001, she visited her father 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
when he was ill with cancer. In 2002, a year after the death of her father, she travelled 
to Iran to visit with her relatives living in Iran. And, in 2008, she travelled to Iran to help 
her mother with her move to Australia. Applicant used her Iranian passport to travel to 
Iran.  
 
After submitting her September 2010 SCA, Applicant was made aware of the 
security concerns raised by her and her husband’s possession of valid foreign 
passports. After she was made aware of these security concerns, on November 2012, 
Applicant turned over both foreign passports (Australia and Iran) to her company’s 
facility security officer (FSO). (AE 2) In January 2013, Applicant destroyed both foreign 
passports in the presence of her FSO, and then returned the mutilated passports to the 
FSO. (AE 3) Applicant’s husband also destroyed both of his foreign passports.  
 
Both Applicant and her husband testified that they do not intend to travel to Iran 
ever again for any reason. They intend to use only their U.S. passports for any foreign 
travel. They would have renounced their Iranian citizenship, but they were told that Iran 
does not accept the renunciation of citizenship and that the renunciation process would 
have brought too much attention to them. 
 
Applicant considers herself and her family to be loyal U.S. citizens. Applicant and 
her husband have chosen to live in the United States, and they are raising and 
educating their children as Americans. They are committed to building their future and 
their children’s future in the United States. Applicant testified that she has no reason to 
be loyal to any other country, but the United States. She has lived most of her adult life 
outside of Iran, and she has no allegiance to Iran. Applicant is considered to be honest, 
trustworthy, and dependable. Both she and her husband are involved in their community 
and their church’s activities. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Iran and its relations 
with the United States: 
The United States has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980, and 
nearly all trade and investment with Iran is prohibited. Iran has sought to illegally obtain 
U.S. military equipment and sensitive technology. Sanctions have been imposed on Iran 
because of its sponsorship of terrorism, its refusal to comply with international 
obligations on its nuclear program (Iran's efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD)), and its dismal human rights record. 
 
The United States has designated Iran as the world's leading state sponsor of 
terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. Iran has sought to 
make the United States suffer political, economic, and human costs. Further, Iran has 
engaged in efforts to sow violence and undermine stability in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
including lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for U.S. casualties. 
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include politically motivated violence and repression, 
including torture, beatings and rape; severe officially sanctioned punishments, including 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
amputation and flogging; arbitrary arrests and detentions, often holding individuals 
incommunicado; little judicial independence and few fair public trials; severe restrictions 
on right to privacy and civil liberties, including freedoms of speech and the press, 
assembly, association, and movement; and monitoring the social activities of citizens, 
entering homes and offices, monitoring telephone conversations and internet 
communications, and opening mail without court authorization. 
 
The Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S. 
Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. Iranian authorities have prevented a 
number of U.S. citizen academics, scientists, journalists, and others who travel to Iran 
for personal, cultural, or business reasons from leaving the country and in some cases 
have detained, interrogated, and imprisoned them. Iranian security personnel may at 
times place foreign visitors under surveillance; monitor hotel rooms, telephones and fax 
machines; and search personal possessions in hotel rooms. 
 
Policies 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for a public trust position. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, 
by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing suitability for a 
public trust position. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive information. The 
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive and classified information enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[Access to sensitive information] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination 
of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the 
applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for 
issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. 
 
Applicant has foreign connections that present a potential risk of divided loyalties 
or undue foreign influence. Applicant has uncles, aunts, cousins, and other extended 
family members, including those on her husband’s side of the family, that are resident 
citizens of Iran. Applicant’s mother, her siblings, and some of her extended family 
members are dual citizens of Iran and Australia residing in Australia. She also has other 
extended family members who are dual citizens of Iran and either Germany or the 
United States, and who are residents of Germany or the United States. Four 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
Applicant’s relationship with her and her husband’s family members who are 
citizens and residents in Iran is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [her] desire to help” her relatives and friends living in Iran. She has close affection 
for her mother, siblings, and extended family members living in Australia. She 
communicates with her immediate family members on a frequent basis. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with family living in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or the 
country has a significant problem with lawless elements or terrorists.  
 
Iran is a country with interests inimical to those of the United States. It actively 
sponsors terrorism against the United States and its allies, and it has used violence to 
undermine the stability of Iraq and Afghanistan. The government of Iran sanctions 
abuse, violence, and repression against its own citizens. The U. S. State Department 
has warned of the danger of travel to Iran for both solely U. S. citizens and those 
holding dual nationality with Iran. Iran does not recognize dual nationality, and it treats 
dual nationals as Iranian citizens. 
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Iran or terrorists seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her family 
living in Iran. Notwithstanding, an Applicant should not be placed into a position where 
she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to 
assist her family living in Iran. Her relationships with her family living in Iran create a 
potential conflict of interest. Her relationship with them is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about her desire to assist them by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts 
with her family living in Iran, raising the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
Applicant left Iran at 18, seeking better education, job opportunities, and religious 
freedom. After a short stay in Europe, she immigrated to Australia in 1984 (age 20), and 
became an Australian naturalized citizen. She married her husband and immigrated to 
the United States in 1998, at age 34. She has lived in the United States for 15 years. 
During this period, Applicant and her husband have established deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. She has two U.S. born daughters who 
are being raised as Americans.  
 
Applicant and her husband have significant proprietary and financial interests in 
the United States, including their $1.5 million home (owing a $400,000 mortgage); their 
401(k) retirement plans (around $300,000 each); and their jobs. Since 1998, Applicant 
worked for government contractors and held positions of trust without any security 
incidents. She has worked for her current employer, a government contractor, since 
May 2009. Applicant’s spouse worked as a university professor, for a government 
agency, and now works for a government contractor providing services to a government 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
agency. Additionally, they both have strong ties in their community as shown by their 
participation in community activities, and their involvement in their church, which 
includes holding important positions of responsibility. 
 
Applicant has a strong affection and sense of obligation to her mother and 
siblings living in Australia, who are dual nationals of Australia and Iran. Because most of 
Applicant’s relatives are living outside of Iran (Australia, Germany, and the United 
States), the security concerns are less. It is unlikely that the government of Iran will be 
able to use Applicant’s relatives living outside of Iran to manipulate or coerce her. 
Applicant’s mother is 82 years old. Applicant believes that because of her mother’s age, 
it is not likely that her mother would ever travel again to Iran. Applicant has no 
immediate family members living in Iran. Her husband has siblings who are residents 
and citizens of Iran with whom Applicant and her husband have infrequent contact. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant is not able to fully meet her 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationships with her relatives, 
friends, and associates who are Iranian citizens and living in Iran] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(a) has limited applicability and does not 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her family living in Iran. 
Although there is no evidence that Iranian government agents or terrorists have 
approached or threatened Applicant or her family living in Iran because of her work for 
the United States, she is nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats and coercion 
made against her family living in Iran. Iran is a country with interests inimical to those of 
the U.S. It actively supports terrorism and is repressive to its own citizens. The U. S. 
State Department has warned of the danger of travel to Iran for both solely U. S. 
citizens and those holding dual citizenship with Iran. 
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is whether Applicant has “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant worked for government 
contractors since 1998, sometimes holding positions of trust. There is no evidence that 
she ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified or sensitive 
information. There is no evidence of any trustworthiness concerns or issues concerning 
her ability to protect sensitive information. 
 
Applicant’s husband and two daughters are naturalized U.S. citizens. Her spouse 
worked for a government agency, and currently works for a contractor providing 
services to a government agency. Applicant and her husband have significant property 
interests in the United States (a home and two retirement plans). Applicant and her 
spouse credibly testified that their loyalty is to the United States. Their actions show that 
they intend to live and retire in the United States. Applicant’s actions show that “[she] 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies with respect to Applicant’s husband’s extended family 
members living in Iran. Their contact and communication is so casual and infrequent 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of foreign influence. AG ¶ 8(d) does 
not apply because Applicant’s contacts and relationships with his family in Iran are not 
on behalf of the U.S. Government. AG ¶¶ 8(e) and (f) are not raised by the facts in this 
case and do not apply.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to her extended family members living in Iran are 
not significant to her or her husband. She has established deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States and she can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The mitigating information taken 
together is sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline B.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the trustworthiness concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 In 1982, Applicant, an Iranian citizen, immigrated to Australia, and became a 
naturalized Australian citizen. She immigrated to the United States in 1998, and became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant continued to 
renew, and possessed valid Australian and Iranian passports. Foreign preference 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a) is supported by the evidence. If these conditions are 
not mitigated they would disqualify Applicant from eligibility to hold a public trust 
position. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for 
foreign preference: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was made aware of the Government’s foreign preference 
concerns raised by her possession of the foreign passports. Shortly thereafter, 
Applicant surrendered her passports to her FSO, and then she and her husband 
destroyed both foreign passports and surrendered them to her FSO. Applicant and her 
husband also expressed their willingness to renounce their Iranian citizenship. Foreign 
preference mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) apply and mitigate the 
trustworthiness concern.  
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
Applicant left Iran in 1982, at age 18, seeking religious freedom, and better 
employment and education opportunities. She immigrated to Australia, and then to the 
United States in 1998. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. She worked for 
government contractors from 1998 to present, sometimes holding positions of trust 
without any trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Applicant’s connections to her extended family members living in Iran are not 
significant to her or her husband. She has established deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States and she can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The mitigating information taken 
together is sufficient to fully overcome the trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines B 
and C. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a position 
of trust. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
