 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10097 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 7, 2012, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 17, 2012. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and he received it on January 8, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
 
2 
 
declined to submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on 
February 25, 2013.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
country of The People’s Republic of China (PRC).1 Department Counsel provided 
supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for these facts in the 
Administrative Notice request. See The PRC section of the Findings of Fact of this 
decision, infra, for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on the 
PRC.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations stated in the SOR. Those allegations 
stated that his mother, father, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, and sister-in-law 
were all residents and citizens of China. These admissions are adopted as findings of 
fact. I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old research scientist for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for the same company since 2003. He was born in Tianshui, China in 1969. He 
came to the United States in 1996 to pursue employment opportunities in the area of 
scientific research. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2008. He has a doctorate 
degree in physics. He has never held a security clearance. He married his wife in April 
1996. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen who was also born in China. They have one son 
who was born in the United States in 2005.4 
 
 Applicant originally came to the United States because Chinese students were 
encouraged by their government to seek opportunities in advanced foreign countries 
because Chinese research lagged behind. There was then an expectation that the 
students would return to China, bringing back a broader knowledge in these scientific 
areas. Applicant received a post-doctoral fellowship at a national laboratory in this 
country. He spent three years in this position before moving to a research associate 
                                                          
1 FORM p. 3-4; Item 6. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Items 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
position at a university. He was in this country on a temporary work visa (H-1) at this 
time. In 2001, he received his permanent resident status.5 
 
 No information is provided about Applicant’s wife’s current occupation or the 
nature of her relationship with her Chinese parents and sister. Likewise, no information 
is contained in the record concerning Applicant’s relationship with his Chinese parents 
and brother, or their occupations in China. Applicant visited his parents in China in 
2008. He did not travel to China before that date because he was afraid he would not be 
able to come back to the United States due to visa delays. He renounced his Chinese 
citizenship when he became a U.S. citizen. Applicant stated the following when asked 
why he wanted to become a U.S. citizen:6  
 
I became a U.S. citizen, because I like [sic] United States and there are 
benefits to be a U.S. citizen. For instances [sic], I want to work on 
Government funded job as my work is scientific and not commercial. The 
government projects allow me to do fundamental studies in order to 
improve the efficiency of the products.7 
 
People’s Republic of China   
 
 The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. The PRC has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.8   
 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive countries in targeting sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology, and economic intelligence. It has targeted the U.S. with 
active intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. In China, authorities have 
monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, 
and internet communications. Authorities opened and censored mail. The security 
services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to 
computers, telephones, and fax machines. All major hotels had a sizable internal 
security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and searched for 
sensitive or proprietary materials.9 
 
 
                                                          
5 Item 5. 
 
6 Items 4-5. 
 
7 Item 5. 
 
8 Item 6. 
 
9 Item 6. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, and in-laws are all citizens and residents of the 
PRC. There is no record evidence regarding their relationship with the communist party. 
China is a communist country with a poor human rights record. It is one of the world’s 
most aggressive nations in the collection of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information. Applicant’s relatives create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. Applicant’s wife is in the same 
position with her relatives. They also create a potential conflict of interest. Applicant 
received all his formal education in China, through his doctoral degree. He left for the 
United States to take advantage of research opportunities, with the expectation from his 
government that he would return and share what he learned. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
6 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are relevant in this case:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant failed to present any information concerning what his relatives do in 
China, whether they are members of the communist party, or whether they have any 
other government affiliation. All we know is that they are citizens and residents of an 
oppressive communist regime that seeks to obtain intelligence from the United States. 
Although Applicant has ties to the United States, they do not constitute “longstanding 
relationships”. As stated above, the protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration and any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security. Doubts 
remain about Applicant because of his connection to his and his wife’s relatives in 
China. Because of Applicant’s close ties to his relatives and the nature of the 
government of China, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant and his wife have been U.S. citizens since 2008. Both of their parents 
and siblings reside in and are citizens of China. Applicant originally came to this country 
to further his knowledge in the area of scientific research with an expectation he would 
return to China and share what he had learned. The PRC has an authoritarian 
government, a bad human rights record, and has a very aggressive espionage program 
aimed at the United States The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the 
United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. Applicant has not overcome the vulnerability to pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, and duress created by his relationship to his relatives and in-laws living in 
China.  
 
 I considered all of Applicant’s evidence. He has done nothing whatsoever to 
question his loyalty and devotion to this country. However, he has simply been unable 
to overcome the “very heavy burden” of showing that he, his wife, or their family 
members in the PRC are not subject to influence by that country.10 His vulnerability to 
foreign pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress remains a concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph s 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007). 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
