 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-03267 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 8, 
2011. On October 1, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines H and E. DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 22, 2012; answered it on October 29, 
2012; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on January 18, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
January 23, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on January 28, 2013, scheduling it for March 1, 2013. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2013. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of information related to the 
use of Adderall and Ritalin by college students, based on a medical journal article, 
transcripts of two news broadcasts, and a list of web sites containing information about 
use by college students. Department Counsel objected, and I declined to take 
administrative notice, because the facts set out in the source materials for Applicant’s 
request were not shown to be generally known and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
However, I admitted the source documents as Applicant’s Exhibit H and advised the 
parties that I would determine what weight to give the source documents after reviewing 
all the evidence in the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations for the conduct alleged under Guideline E. His admissions in his answer 
and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
college in May 2011 with a bachelor’s degree in telecommunications and immediately 
began his employment with a federal contractor. He began working for his current 
employer in September 2012.  
 
Applicant grew up in a small rural town. He attended a public grade school 
through the third grade, and then was in a private church-affiliated grade school from 
the fourth through seventh grade. He completed middle school and high school in a 
public school. (Tr. 51-52.) He was an average student and had no disciplinary problems. 
He helped his father in his electronics business and his mother in her bridal shop. (Tr. 
54-55.)   
 
 Applicant has two siblings, a 30-year-old sister and a 16-year-old brother. 
Applicant invited his younger brother to attend the hearing, because he believed his 
brother would learn a valuable lesson by seeing the adverse consequences of drug use 
and falsification. (Tr. 111.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother was diagnosed with cancer the summer before his senior year 
in high school. (Tr. 86.) He learned that her cancer was terminal shortly before he 
started his freshman year in college. He came home on most weekends to visit his 
mother. (Tr. 87.) She passed away two months after classes started, in late October 
 
3 
 
2006. (Tr. 58-59.) Applicant attended two sessions of grief counseling but found it 
ineffective. (Tr. 92.) 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana during an orientation visit to his college in April 
2006, when it was offered to him by a student who was his host. (Tr. 84-85.) He testified 
that the transition from the small-town atmosphere to life in college was “a major cultural 
shock.” He found that most of his fellow students were from the northeastern United 
States, many from big cities, and they had an attitude and “an edge” that he had not 
experienced before. During his freshman year, he was on academic probation and 
grieving the loss of his mother. He used marijuana in an effort to be accepted and to 
relieve stress. (Tr. 88-89.) He also began using Adderall and Ritalin as a “study aid.” He 
experimented once with hallucinogenic mushrooms in November 2010. (GX 2 at 43-44.) 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard (ARNG). (AX 
C.1.) He testified that he felt he needed the discipline and structure of military service. 
His father had served in the U.S. Air Force from September 1981 to December 1987, 
and was a navigator and electronic warfare officer on B-52 bombers. His grandfather 
also was a military veteran. (Tr. 50-51; 90-91; AX D.1.)  
 
A Report of Medical Examination (DD Form 2808) dated February 24, 2007, 
reflects Applicant’s physical examination upon enlistment. Block 50 of this form, 
pertaining to testing for drugs, contains the handwritten letters, “THC” 
(tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient in marijuana). (AX C.3.a at 2.) Applicant 
testified this entry was made on his DD Form 2808 because an interviewer at the 
Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS) asked him if had used drugs, and he 
answered “Yes.” (Tr. 105-06.) 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on February 25, 2007. He answered “No” to all the 
questions in Section 24, asking about drug involvement. (GX 1 at 22.) He did not 
disclose his use of marijuana, Adderall, and Ritalin.  
 
 Applicant testified that he did not realize that one of the forms he executed was a 
security clearance application. He testified that while he was filing out various forms, he 
told an ARNG recruiter that he had attended grief counseling after his mother’s death. 
According to Applicant, the recruiter told him not to disclose the grief counseling 
because it would complicate and delay his enlistment. He was scheduled to report for 
basic training in May so that he could return to college in the fall. Based on the 
recruiter’s advice about the risk of delaying his enlistment by disclosing potentially 
derogatory information, he decided to answer “No” to the drug-related questions. (Tr. 
92-93.) Although Applicant denied knowing that he was submitting an application for a 
security clearance, he knew that he was submitting documents related to his enlistment, 
and he knew that his negative answer to the drug-related questions was false. (Tr. 129-
30.) He was granted a security clearance in April 2007, but apparently was unaware of 
it. (GX 3; Tr. 93-94.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant testified that he received training on the Army’s drug use policy during 
his basic training. He also received annual refresher training on the Army policy from his 
ARNG unit. He testified that he had no doubt that his drug use was prohibited by the 
Army. (Tr. 113-15.) 
 
In September 2009, Applicant tested positive for THC at a random urinalysis 
while he was attending an ARNG drill. He was notified of the result in May 2010. (Tr. 96-
97.) He was required by his ARNG commander to attend two eight-hour counseling 
sessions in July and August 2010, which he completed. (GX 2 at 45.) He testified that 
he received no diagnosis or prognosis when he completed the counseling. (Tr. 138.)  
 
As a result of Applicant’s positive urinalysis, he was placed in a “hold” status, 
required to turn in his field equipment, and notified that he was being considered for 
administrative separation. (Tr. 97.) He believed that his career in the ARNG was ended, 
and he continued to use marijuana. (Tr. 98.)  
 
In February 2011, the Adjutant General of the state ARNG directed that he be 
discharged with a general discharge under honorable conditions, but his discharge was 
suspended for one year, subject to the requirements that he submit to urinalysis tests at 
the discretion of his commander, submit to a drug treatment program, remain drug free 
during the period of probation and exhibit the potential to remain drug free thereafter, 
refrain from unlawful or inappropriate conduct, and maintain suitable duty performance 
and attendance. (AX A.) He testified that he was unaware of his probationary status 
until August 2011, when he inquired about attending his unit’s annual training. (Tr. 102-
03.) In February 2013, he extended his enlistment in the ARNG for one year. (AX C.1.) 
 
When Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in November 2011, he disclosed 
his drug involvement in great detail. He estimated that the frequency of his marijuana 
was as follows: three times between April and August 2006; about eight times a month 
from August 2006 to February 2007 and from August 2007 to July 2008; about twelve 
times a month from October 2008 to May 2009; about eight times a month from May 
2009 to November 2010; and three times between November 2010 and March 2011. He 
stated that he did not use marijuana from February to August 2007 and July to October 
2008. (GX 2 at 41.) He estimated that he used Adderall and Ritalin about 20 times 
during his five-year college career. (GX 2 at 44.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he purchased his marijuana from other students, but he 
never bought from drug dealers on the street. His suppliers were other students with 
whom he was acquainted. He obtained Adderall and Ritalin from classmates who had 
prescriptions for the drugs. He denied ever selling marijuana, Adderall, or Ritalin. (Tr. 
120-21, 137.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he became concerned about his marijuana use around 
March 2010. He signed an apartment lease with two roommates who were not drug 
users, and he was disappointed when they started using marijuana after he moved in 
with them. (Tr. 99-100.) He stopped using marijuana regularly in November 2010, and 
 
5 
 
used it only three more times afterwards. He last used it after a long night of working on 
a thesis in March 2011.1 He also stopped using Adderall and Ritalin at the same time. 
(GX 2 at 41.) He testified that he needed to make a break from his college behavior and 
prepare for life as an adult. At the hearing, Applicant submitted eight negative urinalysis 
tests conducted between November 6, 2012 and February 26, 2013. (AX B.)  
 
Applicant’s father was were unaware of his drug use while he was in college. (Tr. 
60-61.) His father first learned about it when he saw the SOR. His father testified that 
Applicant has matured and is very serious about his employment and proud of his work. 
He described Applicant as committed and relentless when he decides to do something. 
(Tr. 62-64; AX D.1.) 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend testified that she met Applicant about four years ago, knew 
that he had used drugs, and “grilled” him about it because she does not use drugs and 
does not want to be around drug users. She testified that she would be “very upset” if 
he used drugs again, but she is confident that his drug use is behind him. (Tr. 72-75.) In 
a sworn statement, she stated that she and Applicant have lived together since 
September 2012 and intend to marry. She has watched him mature into a person that 
she deeply respects and trusts. (AX D.7.) 
 
Applicant’s current supervisor testified that he recruited Applicant to work for him 
in May or June of 2012, and Applicant came to work for him in September 2012. He has 
regular contact with Applicant two to four times a week. He testified that he was 
shocked when he read the SOR, because the person described in the SOR is not the 
person that he knows. He testified that Applicant is technically proficient and has 
progressed faster than they had expected. In his view, Applicant’s integrity is “amongst 
the tops.” He testified that Applicant was candid and forthright about his previous drug 
use, and he is confident that Applicant’s drug use is behind him and will not recur. (Tr. 
33-41; AX D.5.) 
 
Applicant’s former supervisor, a retired U.S. Navy captain, hired Applicant and 
had daily contract with him until January 2013. He found that Applicant “displayed a 
maturity and reliability far beyond his peers.” He routinely observed that Applicant had 
the courage to tell him or other senior personnel unpleasant news. He believes that 
Applicant understands the mistakes of the past, has matured into a responsible adult, 
and can be trusted without qualification. (AX D.2.)  
 
A professor emeritus in clinical psychology at Applicant’s university, who is a 
former intelligence analyst, became acquainted with Applicant in the fall of 2007, and he 
hired him for a part-time job in web development. He became Applicant’s friend and 
mentor. He learned that Applicant had a mild learning disability, and his lack of 
academic success led to lowered self-esteem and mild situational depression. He 
concluded that Applicant’s marijuana use and one-time use of mushrooms were 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s thesis received a first place award in May 2011. (AX C.8.) 
 
 
6 
 
motivated by peer pressure, a desire to “belong,” and as a mood enhancer to treat his 
mild depression. He watched Applicant put his childish behavior behind him as he 
matured and became a very truthful and trustworthy individual. He believes that 
Applicant will remain “clean” for the rest of his life. (AX D.3.) 
 
A coworker, who has worked with Applicant for about eight months after retiring 
from the Navy, submitted a statement attesting to his technical skills and dedication to 
his job. He described Applicant as very reliable and dependable. (AX D.4.) A lifelong 
friend described him as a person of integrity and discretion, strongly devoted to his 
family, and deeply remorseful over his previous drug involvement. (AX D.6.) 
 
 When Applicant answered the SOR, he stated that he had severed his 
relationships with his drug-abusing former roommates. He also included the following 
statement in his answer: “As part of my response to the Statement of Reasons I hereby 
make a statement of intent to never again abuse any illegal substance or misuse a legal 
medication, and accept an automatic revocation of my clearance for any violation of this 
statement of intent.” 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
7 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from at 
least April 2006 until at least March 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.a), used hallucinogenic mushrooms 
on at least one occasion in November 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and used Adderall and Ritalin 
without a prescription on various occasions between December 2006 and March 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). It also alleges that he used these illegal drugs while holding a security 
clearance that he received in about April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d). Finally, it alleges that he 
tested positive for THC during a random urinalysis in September 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.e.) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24(a)(1) defines “drugs” as “mood and behavior altering substances,” including Adrugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled 
Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, 
narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the 
 
8 
 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.”  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his response to the SOR and at the hearing establish 
the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;  
 
AG ¶ 25(b): testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s drug abuse was frequent and did not occur under circumstances 
making it unlikely to recur. Thus, my analysis is focused on the first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@). There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct 
is recent. The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). 
 
 I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) is established. Two years of abstinence is a 
“significant period of time,” although the significance of that time period is diminished by 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s frequent drug abuse for the preceding five years. However, his change of 
circumstances from college life to professional life, his deep affection for a young 
woman who strongly disapproves of drug use, his severing of relationships with drug- 
using former roommates, the support his family has shown after learning of his drug 
abuse, and the impressive testimonials from his supervisors have persuaded me that he 
is rehabilitated. AG ¶ 26(b) also is established by this evidence and the statement of 
intent that Applicant included in his answer to the SOR.  
 
 AG ¶ 26(d) is not fully established. Applicant was required by his ARNG unit to 
undergo two eight-hour substance abuse counseling sessions, and he completed the 
requirement in August 2010. However, he continued his drug abuse until March 2011. 
There is no evidence that he received a diagnosis or prognosis upon completion of the 
command-mandated counseling sessions. However, the clinical psychologist for whom 
he worked in college opined that his drug abuse is not likely to recur. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the Guideline H allegations under this guideline (SOR ¶ 
2.a). It also alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his marijuana use when 
he submitted SCA on February 25, 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.b). The concern under this guideline 
is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The disqualifying conditions relevant to Applicant’s answer to Question 24e on 
his SCA are: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and  
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
 
10 
 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 I found Applicant’s testimony that he did not realize that he was applying for a 
security clearance plausible and credible. However, his ignorance of the specific 
purpose of the form he executed is of minimal security significance. He admitted that he 
deliberately and falsely answered “No” to the relevant question about drug use. He 
knew that the questionnaire was part of his enlistment process. Thus, AG ¶ 16(a) is 
established, because he knew that the form he executed would be used to “determine 
employment qualifications” and “award benefits or status.” AG ¶ 16(b), which is broader 
in scope, is also established. 
 
 Three mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts;  
 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and  
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s disclosure of his drug use during 
the MEPS interview on February 24, 2007, preceded his submission of his false SCA on 
February 25, 2007, and was not intended to correct an earlier omission of information. 
He made full disclosure of his drug abuse in his November 2011 SCA, but that 
disclosure was not “prompt.” It was, however, made in good faith and before he was 
confronted with any evidence of his drug abuse. In fact, he was never confronted with 
any evidence, and his disclosure was the sole basis for the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(b) is established. I found Applicant’s testimony about the bad advice 
from the ARNG recruiter plausible and credible. When Applicant submitted his next 
SCA, he was totally candid. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is established. Applicant’s falsification was not “minor” because it 
undermined the integrity of the security clearance process. See ISCR Case No. 01-
03132 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). It did not happen under unique circumstances. 
However, it happened six years ago and was a one-time event. Applicant was an 18-
 
11 
 
year-old, immature, naïve college student when he submitted his false SCA. He has 
since matured, expressed remorse, and gained a reputation for integrity and honesty. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant was candid, sincere, and remorseful at the 
hearing. He is still young, but he has made a clean break from his college days. He is 
fortunate to have a close family and the love of a young woman who admires him but 
will not tolerate drug abuse. He was enthusiastic about his work, and his superiors were 
enthusiastic about having him as a member of their team.  
 
 Applicant’s lack of candor on his first SCA and his serious breach of trust by 
abusing drugs while holding a clearance and serving in the ARNG placed a heavy 
burden on him to demonstrate that he has been rehabilitated. I am satisfied that he has 
carried that burden. By inserting the “statement of intent” in his response to the SOR, he 
put himself on indefinite probation, reinforcing the likelihood that his drug abuse will not 
recur. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on his drug involvement and personal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
