                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
        -------------------------------------                  )         ISCR  Case No.  12-07735      
                                                                   )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances and personal
conduct.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case
On August 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative
determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and DOD recommended
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security  clearance should be
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. This action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended, DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative
Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 28, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on November 26, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing
on December 6, 2012. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and nine exhibits (AEs A-I). The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 14,
2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments to
creditors 1.a, 1.b and creditors 1.j through 1.o. There being no objection from
Department Counsel, and good cause being demonstrated, Applicant was granted
seven days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded one day to
respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
documented payments to creditors 1.a/1.b (the same creditor), 1.e, and 1.i/1.m (the
same creditor).  Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs J through L.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated 15 delinquent debts
totaling more than $27,000 since 1996 and (b) petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief
in May 1996 (discharged in August 1996).
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his security clearance application
(e-QIP) of November 2010 by omitting (a) his failure to pay his taxes for tax years 2008
and 2009; (b) garnishment of his wages from 2004 through 2010 for failure to pay his
taxes, and in September 2010 for failure to pay his student loans; and (c) his delinquent
debts.   
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations pertaining
to the listed delinquent debts. He denied the debts covered by subparagraphs 1.c, 1.j,
1.k, and 1.n. He claimed he could not find either 1.c or 1.j in his credit report and
disputes both debts.  He claimed he is in negotiations with creditors 1.f through 1.h to
resolve the debts. He claimed he has reached settlements with creditors 1.a/1.b, 1.d,
1.e, 1.i/1.m, 1.l, and 1.o.  
Responding to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c,
Applicant denied falsifying his e-QIP. He claimed he misread the questions and
answered them in haste, and with no intention of deceiving the Government.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old system engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The SOR allegations admitted by Applicant are incorporated and
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant married in August 1973 and divorced his spouse in December 1999.
(GE 1) He has three adult children from this marriage. (GE 2) He earned a bachelor’s
degree in electrical engineering from an accredited university in May 1993 and a
master’s degree in industrial engineering from the same university in December 1996.
(GE 2).  He claims no military service.
Finances
Before joining his current employer in August 1999, Applicant owned and
operated plumbing businesses. (GE 2; Tr. 53-54) Struggles with profitability and debt
collections issues with his customers prompted him to close his business and pursue
bankruptcy relief. (GE 2; Tr. 53-54) Records reflect that Applicant accrued back taxes
associated with his plumbing businesses and credit card debts resulting from his
daughter’s misuse of his furnished credit cards. (Tr. 65-66) 
In May 1996, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. In his petition
he scheduled $188,000 of unsecured debts and received his discharge in August 1996.
(GE 2; Tr. 53-55) Documentation of Applicant’s schedules of assets and claims filed
with his Chapter 7 petition is not available.
Between 2009 and 2010, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
Comprising these debts are creditors 1.a/1.b ($338 and $531, respectively, covering the
same debt); creditor 1.d ($1,181); creditor 1.e ($1,458); creditor 1.f ($4,341); creditor
1.g ($6,109); creditor 1.h ($4,635); creditor 1i/1.m ($1,925 covering the same debt);
creditor 1.j ($793); creditor 1.k ($1,094); creditor 1.l ($427); creditor 1.n ($755); and
creditor 1.o ($2,973).  Both his creditor 1.a/1/b debts and his creditor 1.i/1.m debts are
manifest duplications and are treated as such. Applicant attributes these debts to a host
of factors: abusive use of his credit cards by his daughter without his knowledge, 401(k)
advances to cover his old tax debts with the IRS, and debt allocations stemming from
his divorce decree.
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has settled several of his listed debts.  He
documented his completed settlement obligation with creditors 1.a/1.b with a $190
payment in August 2012. (AEs A, B, and J; Tr. 33-35) He provided written proof of his
$750 payment to creditor 1.d in September 2012 in satisfaction of his debt to this
creditor. (AEs C and I; Tr. 37) Applicant  provided documentary proof also of his full
payment of his creditor 1.e debt with a $539 payment in September 2012. (AE F and K)
He confirmed, too, his $1,221 payment in two installments to creditors 1.i/1.m in
September 2012. (AEs B, G, I, and L;  Tr. 42-43, 46-49)  He provided documentation of
his payment to creditor 1.1 in September 2012 in the agreed settlement sum of $314.
(AEs F, I, and K; Tr. 44) And he documented his payoff agreement with creditor 1.o in
the agreed amount of $1,189 (sans any payment proofs) in September 2012. (AE H; Tr.
51-52)  His documented payments to date approximate $3,000. 
4
Afforded an opportunity to furnish documentation of his agreed $1,189 payment
to creditor 1.o, Applicant did not provide any payment evidence. His remaining debts
are still unresolved.  
Some of Applicant’s listed student loan delinquencies with creditors 1.f through
1.h were partially credited through a sustained withholding order, commencing in
September 2010. (GE 2 and AEs D and E) When he was notified of his loan
deficiencies by the education loan entity responsible for servicing his loans, he was told
he owed approximately $16,000 on his three outstanding education loans with this
service. (GEs 3-5 and AEs D and E) His paychecks were garnished bi-weekly between
September 2010 and April 2011 to satisfy his accumulated delinquencies. (Tr. 40-41)
Applicant claims he currently owes around $11,000 on his student loans, a considerable
reduction from his reported balances. (Tr. 41) Because his credit reports do not reflect
his paycheck deductions, it is not clear how much his education balances were reduced.
(GEs 4 and 5) Applicant’s efforts to resolve his education loan deficiencies through
negotiations with his lender have not been successful to date. 
The only other listed debts not addressed are Applicant’s creditor 1.c debt, his
creditor 1.j and creditor 1.k debts, and his creditor 1.n debt. He disputes the creditor 1.c
debt, which has since been removed from his credit reports, and he has been unable to
identify the creditor 1.j and 1.k debts as ones belonging to him. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 35-36, 43-
44) He recognizes the creditor 1.n debt (a charged-off auto account), which he intends
to address soon. (GEs 4 and 5; Tr. 35-36)  Altogether, Applicant still owes in excess of
$13,000 in unpaid delinquent debts covered by the SOR.
Applicant has received no financial counseling to date. (Tr. 68) He currently nets
around $3,636 a month and accrues monthly expenses of approximately $2,198. (GE 3)
He has no money left from his old 401(k) account to address his debts. (Tr. 73) He has
satisfied all of his old federal and state tax debts and has acquired no new credit cards.
(Tr. 74) Applicant is able to meet his current financial obligations and live within his
means.  He has incurred no new debts and is current with his mortgage. (Tr. 55-56)  He
estimates his home to be worth approximately $110,000, and he has two vehicles worth
around $17,000. (GE 2; Tr. 71-73) Applicant is looking for work and estimates good job
prospects with the employer who continues to sponsor his security clearance
application. (Tr. 48-50, 57-61)  He hopes to be able to address his delinquent debts
soon. (Tr. 61-62)
Applicant’s E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in November  2010,  Applicant answered “no” to the
question in Section 26 that inquired about his financial obligations, including whether he
failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law
or ordinance. Applicant answered “no,” and in doing so failed to disclose his failures to
pay taxes for tax years 2008 through 2009. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 66-68) Two months earlier
(in September 2010), he paid all of his back taxes owed to the IRS with $11,000 in
funds borrowed from his 401(k) account. (Tr. 57-60, 74-75) 
5
Both in his OPM interview and in his hearing testimony he attributed his
omissions to oversight and haste. (GE 2; Tr. 79-80) By answering “no”, he omitted his
delinquent 2008 and 2009 tax obligations, which he knew were delinquent. (GE 2; Tr.
67-68) Applicant cannot avert inferences that his omissions were made knowingly and
willfully. 
In the same 2010 e-QIP, Applicant answered “no” to the question in Section 26
that asked whether he had ever had his wages, benefits, or assets garnished for any
reason. In answering in the negative he omitted his wage garnishments from 2004
through 2010 for failure to pay his taxes, and also in September 2010 for failure to pay
his student loans. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 68-69) Applicant was fully aware of the most recent
garnishment actions taken by the IRS and the federal agency charged with
administering the federal Government’s student loan program. (Tr. 67-68, 76-80)
Considering all of the circumstances, inferences warrant that his omissions were made
knowingly and wilfully.
Finally, when completing his November 2010 e-QIP, Applicant answered “no” to 
the question in Section 26 that inquired about whether he is currently over 90 days
delinquent on any debt, and whether he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debt
within the previous seven years. (GEs 1 and 2)  Applicant omitted all of his delinquent
debts when answering the question, and omitted the information knowingly and wilfully.
(GEs 1 and 2; Tr.  66)                                                                                        
Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in December 2010 in connection with his clearance application. When
interviewed, he volunteered information pertaining to a past federal tax lien filed in 1991
to cover $18,000 in unpaid taxes. (GE 2) He furnished voluntary disclosures, too, of
wage garnishments from 2004 to 2010 to enforce the IRS tax lien and in September
2010 to enforce payment of unpaid student loan obligations exceeding $16,000. (GE 2;
Tr. 56-57) 
In this initial OPM interview, Applicant also volunteered old bills and debts turned
over to collection agencies and acknowledged defaults in credit card debts associated
with his daughter’s use of his credit cards in the 2005-2007 time frame. (GE 2) In a
second interview conducted by the same OPM agent in March 2011, Applicant was
confronted with the details of the individual delinquent accounts, which he
acknowledged to the investigator in a manner that squared with his earlier voluntary
answers. (GE 2)
In this second OPM interview, the agent also confronted Applicant with reports of
additional tax liens filed against him besides the 1991 lien he voluntarily disclosed. (GE
2) When confronted, Applicant acknowledged multiple liens filed against him covering
back taxes he owed dating to 1986. (GE 2) He acknowledged owing taxes for the tax
years 1994-1996, as well as for tax years 2008 and 2009. These tax delinquencies
resulted in liens being placed against him. (GE 2; Tr. 67) Together, all of his owed taxes
totaled around $18,000, which he satisfied with lump-sum payment in September 2010.
6
(GE 2; Tr. 67) He has taken no action, however, to have any of liens updated to reflect
his satisfaction of the amounts owed to the IRS.   
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide character references from any identified sources. Nor
did he provide any  performance evaluations or evidence of his contributions to his
employer, family, and community. 
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued,
revoked, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
7
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
8
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a systems engineer with a considerable history of financial instability.
Based on the presented proofs, Applicant incurred multiple tax liens over a 20-year
period associated with poor business conditions. Additionally, he accumulated numerous
delinquent debts that resulted in a bankruptcy in 1996, and additional delinquent debts
since his bankruptcy discharge.  Applicant’s recurrent history of financial problems raises
security concerns.  
Other security concerns arise from Applicant’s omissions of his tax liens, his wage
garnishments, and his delinquent debts. His omissions were material to information
needed by the Government to complete its relevant background checks.  
Financial concerns
Most of Applicant’s listed debts have been paid or resolved. Others remain.
Several debts are disputed (creditors 1.c, 1.j, and 1.k); while previously garnished
student loans (creditors 1.f through 1.h) and two consumer debts (creditor 1.n and 1.o)
remain unaddressed. Outstanding balances on Applicant’s disputed and unpaid debts
approximate $3,000.
Applicant’s past history of accumulations of delinquent debts and his past inability
to resolve his most recent debts, either by payment, successful dispute, or a combination
thereof, warrant  the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for
financial considerations: ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and
¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
9
Extenuating circumstances associated with Applicant’s debts are dated and entail
business losses antedating his 1996 bankruptcy and his daughter’s ensuing misuse of
his credit cards. MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances,” have some application to Applicant’s situation, but
not a great deal based on the tangible evidence presented.  
To date, Applicant has made some payment progress with his listed debts. But he
still owes in excess of $13,000 in delinquent debts after crediting him with duplications
and payments, and has made no documented material progress in addressing his
remaining debts. Since his 2010 OPM interview, he has neither pursued financial
counseling nor explored debt repayment programs with his student loan and consumer
creditors.   At this time, he still has no organized budget or plan in effect to resolve his
remaining debts.  
Financial counseling and follow-up payment initiatives with his creditors could
reasonably be expected of Applicant following his 2010 OPM interview to satisfy the
good-faith and due diligence repayment requirements of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has
received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control,” and MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Based on the
circumstances of this case, Applicant can take very little advantage of either MC ¶ 20(c)
or MC ¶ 20(d). 
While an applicant need not have paid or resolved every one of his proven debts
or addressed all of his debts simultaneously, he needs a credible plan to resolve his
financial problems, accompanied by implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s actions to date, reflect payoffs of some of his
creditors, but no concretized plans to resolve his debts associated with his major student
loans and his two remaining consumer debts.  
                                              
Consideration of Applicant’s background and financial history, his bankruptcy
discharge, his recurrent problems with imposed tax liens associated with his delinquent
taxes and student loans, and his latest struggles with delinquent consumer debts make it
very difficult to credit Applicant with the degree of good judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness necessary to mitigate security concerns about his finances at this time.
Applicant’s corrective efforts taken to date, while encouraging, are insufficient to enable
him to meet his evidentiary burden of mitigating the covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted sufficient good-faith efforts over the 15 years since his
bankruptcy discharge to satisfy his outstanding debts. Since he did not provide any
endorsements or documentation of his work-related evaluations and civic contributions,
whole-person assessment lacks sufficient information to provide any material
countervailing considerations to take into account in making an overall trust assessment
10
of Applicant’s clearance eligibility. In making a whole-person assessment, careful
consideration was given to the respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra),
the AGs, and the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.f through 1.h, and 1.n through 1.p of the SOR. Favorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e, and 1.j through 1.m.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his tax liens, wage
garnishments, and debts over 180 days and 90 days delinquent, respectively, in the e-
QIP he completed in November 2010.  By omitting these liens, garnishment actions, and
delinquent debts, Applicant failed to furnish potentially material background information
about his finances that was needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate
his security clearance application. Both DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment,
or falsification of relevant facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” and DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of
dishonesty or rule violations,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
When first asked about tax liens, wage garnishment actions, and delinquent debts
by the OPM investigator tasked to investigate Applicant’s finances in a December 2012
interview, Applicant voluntarily disclosed some of his tax liens, his wage garnishments,
and delinquent debts turned over to collection agencies. However he did not disclose the
multiple tax liens filed against him until firmly confronted by the interviewing OPM agent
in a second interview conducted in March 2011. 
Applicant’s disclosures that resulted from his being confronted do not meet the
prompt, good-faith requirements of MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with
the facts.”  His answers to questions posed by the OPM agent who interviewed him a
second time in March 2011 cannot be fully reconciled with the prompt, good-faith
requirements of MC ¶ 17(a). And none of the other mitigating conditions covered by
Guideline E apply to Applicant’s situation. Accordingly, Applicant’s corrections of his e-
QIP omissions of material financial information are not fully mitigated. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his finances in the e-QIP he completed, the answers he
provided in his ensuing OPM interviews, his explanations, and whole-person
considerations, his e-QIP omissions and the timing of his corrections are insufficient to
enable him to convincingly refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations.
Questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶
15).  
11
Overall, Applicant’s explanations are not persuasive enough to warrant
conclusions that the falsification allegations relative to his completed 2010 e-QIP
covering his tax liens are either refuted or mitigated.  Applicant’s omissions of his wage
garnishments from 2004 through 2010 and his having debts over 180 and 90 days
delinquent were promptly corrected in good-faith during Applicant’s initial OPM interview
and are mitigated. 
       
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F:           AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs  1.f through 1.h, and
1.n through 1.p:                                      Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e. and
          1.j through 1.m:                                       For Applicant
GUIDELINE E:          AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c:          For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
12
