 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-05359 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 23, 2011. On 
September 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines B and C. DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2012. A notice of hearing was 
issued on January 2, 2013, scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2013.  Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted two exhibits (AX) A and B. I received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 22, 2013. 
 
     Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts with 
respect to Taiwan. Applicant objected to the source documents based on their 
relevance. The Government’s submission was labeled Hearing Exhibit I and entered 
into the record over Applicant’s objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR  
¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference) with explanations. He denied the remaining two SOR 
allegations. He provided additional information to support his case. His admissions in 
his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old, and is a U.S. citizen by birth. He obtained his Master’s 
degree, but he has not yet completed his studies in a PhD program. He has worked as 
a senior software engineer for a number of years. Applicant has worked for his current 
employer since July 2010. (GX 1) Applicant initially obtained a security clearance in 
1979. (Tr. 55) 
 
Applicant met his future wife online. He met her in person in August 2002, and 
married her on December 18, 2002 in the United States while she was on a semester 
break from teaching at a university in Taiwan. His wife, who was born in Taiwan, is a 
citizen of Taiwan. She is a professor of English at a private university in Taiwan. During 
her teaching career, she has received monetary grants from the Taiwanese Ministry of 
Education.  Applicant’s wife returned to Taiwan shortly after their marriage to resume 
her teaching duties at a private university. She learned that she was pregnant a few 
months later and when she attempted to return to the United States, she was not 
allowed to do so due to an incorrect visa. (Tr. 40)  The plan to have their child born in 
the United States was thwarted, and a son was born in September 2003 in Taiwan. 
Applicant left the United States to be present for the birth of his child. He lived in Taiwan 
with his wife and child from September 2003 until June 2004. He arranged with his 
company to work in Taiwan on unclassified items while in Taiwan. (Tr. 40) During 
Applicant’s time in Taiwan, he applied for and received a residency card.  He stated his 
reason was one of convenience for travel. (Tr. 52) The card expired in January 2004. 
(Tr. 52) Applicant did not renew it.   
 
Applicant’s wife is not a U.S. citizen. She has not applied for citizenship although 
she has an alien registration. (GX 1) She has a successful teaching career at the 
 
3 
 
 
university in Taiwan. She is now Chair of the English Department. Applicant’s wife has 
taught English to members of the Taiwanese Air Force and to police. (Tr. 64) Applicant  
met other faculty members at the university in 2003. (GX 1) Applicant also 
acknowledges that he met several of the Taiwanese Air Force personnel. His wife 
invited them for dinner at their house. (GX 3) 
 
In 2004, Applicant, his wife and son returned to the United States when their son 
was nine months old. Applicant’s son is a dual Taiwanese and U.S. citizen. He holds 
two passports. Applicant’s wife received a two-year maternity leave from the Taiwanese 
university. (Tr. 41) Applicant and his wife and son remained in the United States until 
approximately 2006. In 2006, Applicant’s wife and her son returned to Taiwan for one 
semester to maintain her teaching position. However, she returned to the United States 
to care for her mother-in-law who was ill.  Applicant’s wife remained in the United States 
for almost two years (2007-2009) on care leave. (GX 4)  
 
From 2009 until the present, Applicant’s wife has lived and worked in Taiwan at 
the same university. Applicant’s son lives with her in a rented apartment on the 
university campus. Applicant’s wife’s preference is that their son be bilingual, and that 
he should be in elementary school in Taiwan to learn Chinese reading and writing. 
Applicant’s wife continues to pursue her teaching career in Taiwan. (Tr. 44) She and her 
son returned to the United States for semester breaks. When they return to the United 
States, they reside with Applicant. Applicant visits his wife and son in Taiwan 
approximately four or five times a year. (Tr. 75) Applicant’s son recently left the United 
States to return to Taiwan for the school semester. Applicant speaks to his son daily via 
Skype. 
 
When Applicant answered the 2012 SOR, he noted that his son resided with him 
as of August 2012, and attends elementary school in the United States. Applicant 
further noted that his son had no intention to reside in Taiwan in the future. This is 
inconsistent with the facts as he presented them at the hearing. Applicant hopes that his 
son will attend high school and college in the United States, but that is not fully 
established at this time.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Taiwan.  (Tr. 39) She is 74 
years old. She visited the United States in 2004 to see Applicant’s son. Applicant has 
not had any contact with her for three years.  Since 2009, Applicant’s wife has also 
cared for her mother who is now crippled due to an accident. Applicant’s father-in-law is 
deceased.  
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. 
When he was in Taiwan, Applicant had contact with them. His brother-in-law inspects 
hotels. His sister-in-law is a teacher. For the past few years, he has not had contact with 
them. Applicant does not provide any support for them.  
 
Applicant’s wife inherited property from her father in Taiwan. According to 
Applicant, his wife has property valued at approximately $1 million. (Tr. 79) She also 
 
4 
 
 
has a bank account in Taiwan. Applicant, when questioned again about the property, 
stated that he really did not know if this was true as he only had his wife’s word.  (Tr. 
126) Applicant’s son has a home in his name that was given to him by his grandmother. 
Applicant noted that he believes there is a family dispute about some of the property. 
There is also the possibility that his wife owns farmland. (Tr. 128) Applicant claims that 
he has no right to any of this property.  Applicant’s wife owns half of the property 
interest in Applicant’s home in the United States. (Tr. 47) 
 
The SOR did not allege that Applicant’s wife owns property in Taiwan. At the 
hearing after much discussion about an amendment to the SOR, I allowed Counsel over 
the objection of Applicant, to amend the SOR 1.e to state “Applicant’s wife owns 
property and has a bank account in Taiwan.” (Tr. 130) 
 
In November 2012, Applicant filed for divorce. (AX A) He claims that he and his 
wife’s lives have diverged during the past years. His wife noted in an affidavit that she 
has not made any decision concerning a divorce. (AX B) Applicant elaborated that they 
are still married, and that she stays with Applicant when she comes to the United 
States. He then noted that he was not sure what would occur. She has not agreed to a 
divorce yet and he is somewhat ambivalent. Applicant does not wish to live in Taiwan 
due to the poor climate. (Tr. 71)  He is not asking for custody of his son because he 
believes that issue should be resolved amicably between the parties. However, he 
wants his son to receive a high school education in the United States.  
 
 Applicant stated that he does not have a high level clearance and that Taiwan 
would not be interested in the work that he performs. Applicant’s wife knows about 
Applicant’s security clearance issues and that he is attending a hearing.  Applicant 
noted that he informs his security officer when he travels to Taiwan. He believes that 
there is no evidence of a heightened risk just because his son attends school in Taiwan 
and his wife teaches English in Taiwan. Moreover, he stated that Taiwan is a friendly 
country that has maintained economic and military cooperation with the United States. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
As noted above, Applicant travelled to Taiwan and lived there for one year when 
his son was born in September 2003. He stated that due to the fact that his wife did not 
have the proper visa, she was not allowed to enter the United States when she was 
pregnant, and he was “forced” to go to Taiwan to be with her for the birth. He admitted 
that he had applied for and had a residency card for Taiwan, as he was married to a 
Taiwanese citizen. He used the card for travel convenience. The card expired in 2004. 
The medical benefits that he received while living in Taiwan were based on his wife’s 
medical insurance through her employment. He has no desire to reside in Taiwan. He 
was credible when he explained that he has no preference for Taiwan. 
 
 
   
 
 
5 
 
 
Administrative Notice 
  
 Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy; however, “maintaining strong, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan is also a major U.S. goal, in line with the U.S. desire to 
further peace and stability in Asia. The United States supports Taiwan’s membership in 
appropriate international organizations where statehood is not a requirement for 
membership and encourages its meaningful participation in appropriate international 
organizations, such as the World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic 
relations with the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has been recognized to be in the 
long-term interest of the United States by six consecutive administrations. 
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resorting to coercive measures against its citizens 
to collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States have expanded since 1979. 
Export-Import Bank financing, Overseas Private Investment Corporation guarantees, 
normal trade relations (NTR) status, and ready access to U.S. markets have enhanced 
the Taiwan economy. “In recent years, AIT commercial dealing with Taiwan have 
focused on expanding market access for American goods and services.” AIT has been 
engaged in a series of trade discussions that have focused on protection of intellectual 
property rights and market access for U.S. goods and services. 
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
import of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One report to 
Congress concerns foreign economic collection and industrial espionage. That report 
notes that Taiwan was then known to be an active collector of U.S. economic 
intelligence. The report ranked Taiwan after China, Japan, Israel, France, and Korea as 
an active collector of such information. Although some record information about 
Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting U.S. classified or sensitive information is more 
than 10 years old, several exhibits address more recent espionage by Taiwan’s National 
Intelligence Bureau (NSB). There is some evidence that Taiwan has specifically 
targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven years to obtain protected and classified 
information.  
 
The United States is committed to assisting Taiwan with maintenance of 
Taiwan’s defensive capabilities. “The United States has continued the sale of 
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan in accordance with the Taiwan 
Relations Act, which provides for such sales and which declares that peace and stability 
 
6 
 
 
in the area are in U.S. interests. Sales of defensive military equipment are also 
consistent with the 1982 U.S.-P.R.C. Joint Communique.”      
 
 Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. Department of State urges 
caution within the vicinity of any public demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
7 
 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable. A 
disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Also, AG ¶ 7(b) states that 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information.” Finally, AG ¶ 7(e) states that “a substantial business, 
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-
operated business, which could subject the individual to a heightened  risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation.” 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
 
8 
 
 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided).  
  
 While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Taiwan seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Applicant’s 
relationship with his wife and son living in Taiwan creates a potential conflict of interest 
because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire 
to assist his family living in Taiwan and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation.  
 
 Applicant’s wife is a Taiwanese citizen who spends her time between the United 
States and Taiwan. She has a permanent resident status but has not become a U.S. 
citizen. Applicant’s son is a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States. Applicant has 
traveled between the United States and Taiwan since he married in 2002. His wife 
teaches at a private university in Taiwan and their son is currently schooled in Taiwan. 
She returns to the United States when she is on semester break. Applicant’s son also 
returns to the United States on school break. However, he is attending elementary 
school in Taiwan and lives officially with his mother.  Applicant cares about the welfare 
of his wife and son currently living in Taiwan.   
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. Applicant’s wife 
communicates with her mother on a regular basis. Applicant has not had contact with 
his mother-in-law for three years. A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002). Applicant maintains some relationship with these family members, albeit a 
distant one. He saw them when he lived in Taiwan in 2003-2004. His mother-in-law 
visited Applicant and his wife and son in the United States in 2004 or 2005. 
 
9 
 
 
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise an issue of a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.   
Based on all these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶ 7(a), and 7(b) are applicable.  
 
The property and bank account that Applicant’s wife owns in Taiwan falls under 
AG 7 ¶ (e). Applicant is still married to his wife and could be affected by this property. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 7(e) is applicable.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can also be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
 Under AG 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply in this case. Applicant’s wife and 
only son live in Taiwan. His wife and son are Taiwanese citizens. Granted, his wife and 
son periodically return to the United States, and his son is a dual citizen of the United 
States and Taiwan, but this is Applicant’s immediate family. His wife has worked for 
many years at a university. She has taught English to Taiwanese military personnel. 
Applicant has met them. Applicant travels to Taiwan frequently. His loyalty to his wife 
(they are still married) and son are a positive trait; however, for security clearance 
purposes, those same connections to his immediate family in Taiwan negate the 
possibility of mitigation, and Applicant has failed to fully meet his burden of showing 
there is “little likelihood that his relationship with his wife and son who are Taiwanese 
citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or 
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 9. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member.” This includes but is not limited to: “(1”) possession of a 
current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Applicant lived in Taiwan from 2003 until 2004 
so that he could be with his wife when she gave birth to their son. His wife was working 
and had medical benefits through her employer. As a spouse, Applicant received some 
medical benefits. That no longer applies.  He obtained a residency card when he lived in 
Taiwan. It expired in 2004. This is not equivalent to citizenship. He has no desire to live 
in Taiwan or lose his U.S. citizenship. He obtained the card for travel convenience. He 
had no thought of the consequences for a future security clearance.  Applicant has 
mitigated any foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth. He married a woman who is a Taiwanese 
citizen. He has a son who has dual citizenship with Taiwan and the United States. His 
wife and son live in Taiwan and periodically visit Applicant in the United States. His wife 
is a professor at a Taiwanese university. She has not applied for U.S. citizenship. 
Despite the fact that recently Applicant filed a complaint for divorce, he waivered at the 
hearing as to whether he would get divorced. His son attends school in Taiwan. His son 
is obviously precious to Applicant. Applicant also travels to Taiwan frequently. 
 
 Applicant chose to marry a Taiwanese citizen. Granted, he does not wish to live 
in Taiwan at any time in the future. He wants his son to attend high school in the United 
States, and he is contemplating a divorce. Despite the fact that there is no evidence that 
Applicant has had any incidents with his security clearance, there is the possibility of 
 
11 
 
 
conflict given the present situation. Applicant vacillated on a number of points. He was 
unsure about completion of his divorce. After assessing his credibility, demeanor, and 
sincerity at his hearing, I have doubts as to Applicant’s suitability to retain his security 
clearance.   
 
 His wife knows that Applicant has a security clearance and the issues 
surrounding the case. I am not questioning his loyalty to the United States, but I have 
doubts as to his overcoming any manipulation or inducement concerning the welfare of 
his son or his wife. All doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference but not 
foreign influence.  Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegation in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant  
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In view of all the circumstances presented in this case, it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
