 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 12-06607 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G, F, and E. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 5, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me January 3, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
17, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 7, 2013. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into the record without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open until February 14, 
2013, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely submitted AE D 
though G, which were admitted into the record without objection.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He is a high school graduate and has attended 
technical training. He is not married and has no children. He served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from 2001 to 2005, attained the rank of sergeant (E-5), and was honorably 
discharged. He served a seven-month tour in Kuwait and a 13-month combat tour in 
Iraq. Applicant has had a secret security clearance since approximately 2001 or 2002. 
He has not always been working in jobs that required a clearance so he was unaware 
that his clearance was still active.2  
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana approximately once in 2001, 2005, and 2006. 
He used hallucinogenic mushrooms approximately once in 2007. He used Ecstasy 
approximately three times in 2005. He used cocaine approximately two times between 
2005 and 2007, and he used Vicodin, without a prescription, approximately four times 
between 2005 and 2007. He explained he had a security clearance when he used the 
illegal drugs, but he was not working for the Government at the time.3 
 
 Applicant testified that he used the drugs at parties when someone offered him 
the drugs. He knew the person and was always curious to see what the effects were so 
he used them. He stated it was not something he did regularly. “It was just every now 
and then it had come across my path and I had tried it.”4 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose his illegal drug use on his December 29, 2011, 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). The questionnaire 
specifically asked under Section 23, if in the past seven years, he had illegally used any 
drugs or controlled substances. He answered “no.”5  
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s memorandum is HE I. 
 
2 Tr. 18-20. 
 
3 Tr. 62-63. 
 
4 Tr. 64. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose the required information was that he 
did not know how to word his drug use, and he felt more comfortable waiting to tell an 
investigator instead of disclosing it on the e-QIP.6 He also stated that he intended to 
disclose his illegal drug use but did not.7 In his answer to the SOR he stated: “ 
 
I did initially list my prior experimentation with drugs on the [e-QIP] but had 
removed it before submitting it, not because I wanted to hide it, but 
because after I typed it up I realized how awful it looked with everything 
else that was listed. I [chose] to defer disclosure until I could speak to the 
investigator. I felt more comfortable waiting until I was interviewed to 
disclose it. I brought it to the investigator’s attention as I felt it was in the 
best interest of myself and the U.S. Government if I gave full disclosure.  
 
 During Applicant’s interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
investigator, Applicant stated he did not disclose his illegal drug use on his e-QIP 
because when he originally read the question, he was uncertain how to respond. He 
was confused by the question and was not certain if experimental use was applicable to 
the question. He further explained that because his use was experimental, he decided 
to originally answer the question “no” and then planned to discuss his experimental use 
with the investigator when he was interviewed. Applicant described his drug use as 
experimental. He was curious and wanted to try the drugs. He does not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future.8  
 
 In April 2011 Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI), 
operating a vehicle without insurance, license not carried/exhibited, and careless 
driving. Applicant was drinking alcohol and drove his car hitting a moped with two 
people on it. The people were injured, but not seriously. He had no injuries. The moped 
was totaled. His breathalyzer result was .22%. He did not have insurance because he 
had let it lapse. The victims are suing Applicant civilly.9 
 
 Applicant explained that he was out with friends and did not anticipate drinking as 
much as he did. He had a designated driver and had left his car with a valet service. He 
does not know why but he decided to drive after drinking.  Applicant does not remember 
much of what happened.10  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Tr. 58-63. 
 
7 Tr. 64-65. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. 29-31, 45. 
 
10 Tr. 22-24, 83-87. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was convicted of DUI in October 2011. He was sentenced to 30 days in 
jail, which was suspended, placed on probation for 12 months, ordered to attend DUI 
class, complete 150 hours of community service within 10 months, fined $1,500, and 
ordered to pay approximately $10,000 in restitution to the accident victims. He was also 
ordered to abstain from alcohol consumption for six months and his license was 
revoked.11 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: “All of the requirements of my 
sentencing were completed and my probation was terminated early. I was not required 
to serve jail time.” He further stated in his answer:  
 
I made a personal decision to stop drinking after the accident, on my own, 
before I had ever attended either the court ordered classes or the 
evaluation for treatment. The experience had a strong emotional impact 
on me that had nothing to do with any embarrassment, financial hardship 
incurred, or enormous amount of time and energy spent both before and 
after my sentencing. I always made it a point not to drink and drive, I have 
had several awful experiences in [the] past where people that I was close 
to were killed because they had driven under the influence. Alcohol had 
never been a problem in my life before, and I had never considered that I 
would be one to drink so much that it would result in my being in a 
situation where I would even attempt to drive. It could have gotten 
someone else maimed or killed, let alone myself. The victims and I are 
unbelievably lucky that it did not happen. 
 
 When questioned at his hearing, Applicant admitted he did not stop drinking until 
February 2012, ten months after the accident, which was a violation of his probation. He 
resumed drinking in May 2012. He was required to abstain from consuming alcohol for 
six months beginning in October 2011, when he was sentenced. His license was 
revoked, and he admitted that he continued to drive with a revoked license to and from 
work. He admitted he has been driving for the past 11 months without a license. He 
stated he drives on a revoked license because he cannot afford to pay for insurance, an 
ignition lock, and the fees associated with reinstating his license. In addition, he 
admitted he failed to disclose his arrest to his facility security officer until about six 
months after the incident. Applicant stated he has not completed all of the requirements 
for the DUI program. As part of the program he was to complete an alcohol evaluation. 
He has had one appointment, but needs a minimum of three visits. He indicated he 
needed time to complete the appointments, and he has been busy working to obtain a 
steady income. He also stated he previously could not afford the $50 fee, but can now. 
He stated he was released three weeks early from probation. When asked if the court 
was aware of his probation violations, he stated he was never asked.12  
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a ($210) a delinquent medical debt. Applicant paid the 
delinquent debt in June 2011. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($612) is a medical debt that was 
                                                          
11 Tr. 24-29. 
 
12 Tr. 23-29, 34-36, 68-80. 
 
 
5 
 
 
paid in October 2012. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($134) is a medical debt that was paid in 
October 2012.13 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to helping his family with loans when 
they had difficulties. His family failed to repay him the loans. He helped his stepfather 
who had medical needs. He also had a roommate who failed to pay his portion of the 
rent.14 
 
 A witness testified on behalf of Applicant. He helped Applicant get his job and at 
one time was his supervisor. He stated he has no reason to not trust Applicant, and 
Applicant has not tried to hide anything. He trusts him at work and would trust him with 
his life. He described Applicant as honest and forthcoming.15  
 
 Applicant provided copies of military awards and achievements. He provided 
character letters that describe him as a valuable employee. He is personally and 
professionally respected by leadership, his peers, and subordinates. He is an asset and 
integral part of the team. He is considered a model employee and can be counted on to 
complete the task. He is considered a responsible individual who is trustworthy, 
dependable, truthful, courteous, and an excellent decision maker.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
13 Tr. 41-44; AE E, F, G. 
 
14 Tr. 36-41. 
 
15 Tr. 94-100. 
 
16 Tr. 20; AE A. 
 
6 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant had debts that he failed to pay and they became delinquent. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from those financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant had difficulty paying his debts because he was helping his family by 
loaning them money. They failed to repay him. He helped his stepfather who had 
medical needs. He also had a roommate that refused to pay his portion of the rent. 
Applicant has paid the delinquent debts that are alleged in the SOR. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. It appears Applicant’s financial problems are resolved and under control. I find 
AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22, and the 
following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 Appellant was convicted of DUI in October 2011. While driving drunk he hit a 
moped and caused injuries. I find the above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23, and the 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and  
  
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions take to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant had a serious alcohol-related incident. As part of his probation he was 
required to abstain from alcohol consumption for six months from the date of his 
sentence. His answer to the SOR was misleading, stating he voluntarily abstained from 
drinking alcohol. He continued to drink alcohol in violation of his sentence, and it was 
not until approximately five months after he was ordered to abstain, did he comply.  
 
 Applicant had his license revoked, but continued to drive, justifying his actions. 
He still drives in violation of the revocation. Applicant was required as part of his 
sentence to complete a DUI program. As part of that program, he was to have an 
alcohol assessment. He has attended only one of the three required appointments for 
his assessment. His testified he was released from probation early, but he did not 
disclose to the probation officer his violations. His testimony was not credible. Applicant 
continues to consume alcohol. Applicant’s actions raise questions about his credibility 
and his ability to comply with rules and regulations. Insufficient time has passed since 
Applicant’s serious alcohol-related incident. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that his behavior is unlikely to recur and that he has resolved any issues he may have 
with alcohol. He failed to comply with the terms of his probation. I find the above 
mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets out the security concern relating to Personal Conduct.  
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following:  
 
 
9 
 
 
 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant had a duty to disclose information about his drug use on his e-QIP. He 
deliberately chose not to comply with the e-QIP requirements and withheld the 
information. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I find Applicant’s failure to disclose information was intentional and deliberate. 
His eventual disclosure on his terms is not the standard. His actions are not minor, and I 
am not convinced they are unlikely to recur. I find his actions cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The above mitigating conditions do not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
10 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Marine Corps and was honorably discharged. He is a 
valued team member to his employer. He had some financial difficulties that he 
resolved. He was involved in a serious alcohol-related incident, and was in violation of 
certain provisions of his probation. He did not complete an alcohol assessment that was 
required. Insufficient time and evidence was provided to conclude it is unlikely alcohol 
will be a recurring problem. Applicant’s failure to be honest on his e-QIP is also a 
serious concern. I considered all of Applicant’s testimony and found that he was not 
completely honest about information he provided, and he provided misleading 
statements and testimony. In his answer to the SOR, he claimed he voluntarily stopped 
drinking after the accident. At his hearing, he admitted he was required to abstain from 
alcohol consumption for six months, but he did not comply with the requirement. His 
license is revoked, but he continues to drive without a license. I have not considered 
these issues for disqualifying purposes, but have considered them when analyzing the 
whole person and when making a credibility determination. Along with his failure to be 
honest on his e-QIP, he provided misleading information which shows a pattern of 
dishonesty and deception. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the alcohol consumption 
and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
