 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )     ISCR Case No. 12-03405 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a native of Afghanistan, who became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
August 2008. His father, brother, and spouse have Afghan citizenship but live in the 
United States. Applicant’s grandmother, his aunt and uncles, his brother-in-law (sister’s 
husband), and his parents-in-law, are resident citizens of Afghanistan. The foreign 
influence concerns raised by his security significant ties to these family members are 
mitigated by his commitment to the United States, as evidenced by his service as a 
contract linguist for the Department of Defense (DOD). Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and 
explaining why it was unable to grant a security clearance to Applicant. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
 
 2 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 8, 2012, and he requested a 
decision without a hearing. On December 11, 2012, the Government submitted a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) consisting of 9 exhibits (Items 1-9). On December 13, 2012, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded a copy of the FORM to 
Applicant and instructed him to respond within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
FORM on January 22, 2013. In his January 23, 2013 rebuttal to the FORM, Applicant 
did not object to any of the Government’s exhibits. Applicant’s rebuttal was accepted 
into the record as Applicant exhibit (AE) A without objection. On February 5, 2013, the 
case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested that the DOHA administrative judge 
take administrative notice of certain facts pertinent to the Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan (Afghanistan) and its foreign relations. The request for administrative notice 
was based on nine publications, consisting of documents of the U.S. State Department 
and statements from the Director of National Intelligence and of Admiral Mullen, then 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.1 Applicant did not file any objections to the 
Government’s request for administrative notice or to any specific facts set forth 
pertaining to Afghanistan. Accordingly, I took administrative notice, subject to my 
obligation to make accurate and timely assessments of the political landscape in foreign 
countries when adjudicating Guideline B cases. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11292 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). 
 
 The State Department’s Bureau of Consular Affairs issued an updated 
Afghanistan: Country Specific Information on January 28, 2013, and a new Travel 
Warning:  Afghanistan on January 29, 2013. The parties were notified by email on 
February 20, 2013, of my intention to review those documents. The facts 
administratively noticed are set forth in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
 In footnote 71 of the FORM, Department Counsel indicated that notwithstanding 
Applicant’s admission to SOR 1.f, alleging the Afghan residency and citizenship of his 
grandmother, two aunts, and one uncle, the evidence indicates that one of Applicant’s 
                                                 
1
The source documents identified in the FORM were provided to the Applicant with copies to the DOHA 
administrative judge to be furnished on request. The documents were all available on the Internet. See 
www.state.gov for the State Department, www.dni.gov for DCNI Clapper’s statement on the Worldwide 
Threat Assessment, and www.jcs.mil for Admiral Mullen’s speech at the Senate Armed Services 
Committee Hearing on Iraq and Afghanistan. 
 
 3 
aunts lives in Pakistan, and that he has a second uncle in Afghanistan. To conform to 
the evidence, Department Counsel proposed that SOR 1.f should be amended to read, 
“Your grandmother, 1 aunt and 2 uncles are citizens of Afghanistan, living in 
Afghanistan.” Applicant did not respond to this proposed amendment or submit 
information contrary to it. SOR 1.f was amended at the Government’s motion. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The amended SOR alleges under Guideline B, foreign influence, that Applicant’s 
father (SOR 1.a) and brother (SOR 1.b) are Afghan citizens, who reside in the United 
States. Also under Guideline B, Applicant’s fiancée (SOR 1.c), his future in-laws (SOR 
1.d), his brother-in-law (sister’s husband) (SOR 1.e), and other close relations (his 
grandmother, one aunt, and two uncles) (SOR 1.f) are resident citizens of Afghanistan. 
Applicant admitted the allegations but for SOR 1.c. He married his fiancée, who 
immigrated to the United States on a fiancée visa in January 2012, and she now resides 
in the United States. After considering the Government’s FORM, including Applicant’s 
Answer (Item 3) and his rebuttal to the FORM (AE A), I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old defense contractor employee, who has been working 
as a linguist for the U.S. military in a combat zone since February 3, 2012. (Items 4, 5; 
AE A.) 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in October 1985. His father served in the 
Afghan Army from 1979 to 1992 before working as a carpenter. Applicant’s mother 
worked as an architectural engineer. (Items 6C, 8.)  Around 1997, the Taliban took over 
the family’s home and imprisoned Applicant’s father because of his previous service in 
the Afghan Army. After about a month, the family received word that Applicant’s father 
had been killed. Applicant fled with his mother and siblings to Pakistan, where they 
awaited refugee visas to come to the United States. Applicant worked making shoes 
instead of going to school to help support the family while in Pakistan. (Item 6C.) In April 
2003, Applicant immigrated to the United States with his mother and siblings (two 
brothers, then ages 6 and 12, and two sisters, then ages 10 and 14). Applicant enrolled 
in high school. (Items 4, 5, 8.) In 2005, Applicant’s family learned that his father was 
alive and would be joining them in the United States. About a month later, the family 
was reunited. (Items 6c, 8.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school at age 20 in June 2006. He began part-
time study in auto mechanics at a local community college while working at a 
restaurant. Applicant took classes on and off for the next three years, but he did not 
earn a degree. For four years, from October 2007 to December 2011, Applicant was 
employed full time as a “value stream operator” for a private company. (Items 4, 5, 8.)  
In early August 2008, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He took no steps to 
formally renounce his Afghan citizenship, but he no longer considered himself to be a 
citizen of Afghanistan. (Items 4, 5, 6C, 8.) In November 2008, Applicant obtained his 
 
 4 
U.S. passport. In May 2009, Applicant purchased the home in which he resided with his 
family. (Items 4, 5.) 
 
 Around June 2009, the elder of Applicant’s sisters married an Afghan citizen in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his family attended the wedding. It was Applicant’s first trip 
back to Afghanistan since he fled with his mother and siblings to Pakistan in 1997. 
Applicant met his future fiancée (now spouse) at the wedding. She was a college 
student studying to become a teacher. During his 45-day stay in Afghanistan, Applicant 
was hosted by his new brother-in-law and his family. He saw his grandmother during 
that trip. After he returned to the United States, Applicant had ongoing contact, about 
twice a week, with his future fiancée. (Item 6C). 
 
 In November 2010, Applicant returned to Afghanistan for three weeks. He stayed 
with his grandmother for a few days before spending the remainder of his time with his 
fiancée and her parents. His fiancée accepted his marriage proposal during that trip. 
(Items 5, 6C.)  
 
Around September 2011, Applicant was offered a position by his current defense 
contractor employer to work as a linguist for the U.S. military. On October 6, 2011, 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). Applicant disclosed that he, his mother, his sisters, and his 
youngest brother, were previously citizens of their native Afghanistan, before they 
became naturalized in the United States. His father and his other brother were still 
citizens of Afghanistan. However, his brother was a U.S. permanent resident. His father 
had a work permit and was in the process of becoming a U.S. permanent resident. 
Concerning other foreign contacts, Applicant indicated that he had weekly telephone 
contact with his fiancée, an Afghan resident citizen whom he planned to marry on her 
arrival to the United States. Applicant listed his trips to Afghanistan in 2009 and 2010 to 
visit family and friends. (Item 4.) 
 
On November 11, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He explained that his family fled 
Afghanistan as refugees. He had become a naturalized U.S. citizen, and his allegiance 
was solely to the United States. He denied he could be influenced because of his 
contacts with foreign nationals. Applicant indicated that his brother who holds U.S. 
permanent residency worked as a camp director for a charitable organization. His father 
was a carpenter, but he had been laid off.2 Applicant disclosed his relationship with his 
fiancée, a student in Afghanistan, with whom he had contact by telephone three times 
weekly since July 2009. She was unaware that he was being considered for a DOD 
security clearance. Applicant added that due to “oversight,” he had not previously 
disclosed that he had an uncle, who lived in Afghanistan, with whom he had contact 
twice yearly by telephone. He related that this uncle was an office worker for a UK or 
Australian company. (Item 8.) 
 
                                                 
2 
Applicant’s father was apparently laid off in 2011. (Item 6C.) 
 
 5 
On January 2, 2012, Applicant executed an e-QIP for the clearance needed to 
participate in a U.S. military linguist program in Afghanistan. In response to section 20B 
concerning foreign business, professional activities, and foreign government contacts, 
Applicant disclosed that his fiancée had obtained a visa to come to the United States 
under his sponsorship, but she had not yet arrived. (Item 5.) 
 
On January 19, 2012, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator to 
obtain further details about his background and foreign contacts. Applicant disclosed his 
family’s flight from the Taliban. He has no assets in Afghanistan, and indicated that he is 
ineligible for dual citizenship with the U.S. and Afghanistan. He expressed no desire to 
obtain foreign citizenship because he was loyal to the United States. Applicant was 
excited to work with “our” [the U.S.] military because he felt obligated to help the country 
that has offered so much to him and his family. He understood that acquisition of a 
foreign citizenship or passport could justify revoking his eligibility for a sensitive position 
or access to classified information or both. Applicant explained that his brother with U.S. 
permanent residency had applied for U.S. citizenship, but his application was delayed 
because he had sold cigarettes to a minor while working at a gas station. Applicant 
related ongoing contacts with this brother three or four times a week. He also indicated 
that his fiancée would be coming to the United States on a fiancée’s (K-1) visa on 
January 20, 2012. She knew he was seeking a DOD security clearance to work in 
Afghanistan with the U.S. military, but she had expressed no undue interest. He denied 
that his future parents-in-law have any current obligation to Afghanistan’s government 
or military. His future father-in-law is a contractor for a foreign-owned company while his 
future mother-in-law does not work outside the home. (Item 6C.) 
 
 As for his extended family members in Afghanistan, Applicant disclosed 
telephone contact with his grandmother no more than two or three times a year. His 
contacts with his aunt, a homemaker, were limited to his trips to Afghanistan. His 
sister’s husband works for a European technology corporation in Afghanistan pending 
permission from U.S. immigration authorities to join his wife in the United States. 
Applicant’s sister had reportedly “messed up” the documents for her spouse to 
immigrate to the United States. Applicant expressed his belief that his brother-in-law 
was aware of his plans to work in Afghanistan as a linguist. Applicant revealed that he 
has a maternal aunt, who lives and works as a physician in Pakistan. He has had little to 
no contact with this aunt, although his mother is in regular contact with her sister. 
Applicant also has an uncle in Afghanistan, whom he “thinks” works as a cultural 
advisor. Applicant expressed his belief that this uncle has no obligation to the Afghan 
government or military.3 He has had little contact with him apart from his visits to 
                                                 
3 
Applicant did not mention during his first interview that one of his aunts lived in Pakistan or that he had 
an uncle in Afghanistan, who works as a cultural advisor. His January 2012 disclosure of these foreign 
family members is the evidence supporting the Government’s amendment to the SOR. In his rebuttal to 
the FORM, Applicant indicated that only his stateside family members knew about his DOD contract work 
(“no one is to know about, my grandmother, aunt, and uncle and my in-laws are not aware and don’t 
know about what I do for a living and I did not [have] contact with them since I contracted with [the] 
Department of Defense.” (AE A.) Applicant mentioned only one uncle in Afghanistan. The uncle 
discussed in the January 2012 interview had a different name and occupation than the uncle mentioned 
by name in his first interview. It could be that the uncle, who he indicated in January 2011 was an office 
 
 6 
Afghanistan in 2009 and 2010. Applicant’s family members live in the same city in 
Afghanistan,4 while his in-laws live in northern Afghanistan.  (Item 6C.) 
 
Applicant’s fiancée came to the United States in January 2012, and she and 
Applicant married shortly after her arrival.5 On October 8, 2012, Applicant informed 
DOHA that his spouse was in the process of acquiring her U.S. permanent residency. 
(Item 3.)6 Her application for a green card had not been filed as of January 23, 2013.7 
(AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s family members in the United States are aware that he is working in 
Afghanistan as a contract linguist for the United States military. As of January 23, 2013, 
Applicant’s father had filed for U.S. permanent residency. According to Applicant, his 
father’s case had “turned to court with unknown reason.” Applicant’s brother had not yet 
applied for naturalization because he cannot afford the cost. He is a full-time student, 
who works only part time in retail and cannot afford the filing cost. Applicant’s sister, 
who is married to the Afghan resident citizen, is a stateside contract Dari language 
instructor for the U.S. military. Applicant’s other sister currently attends college in the 
United States. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant had not told his extended family members living abroad, including his 
parents-in-law in Afghanistan, about his defense contractor employment. He reports no 
contact with his foreign relatives since he began working as a contract linguist for the 
DOD. Applicant’s spouse has not returned to Afghanistan to see her parents since she 
moved to the United States, and she has no plans to travel to Afghanistan in the near 
                                                                                                                                                             
worker for a foreign company, is related by marriage to Applicant’s aunt in Afghanistan, although the 
evidence is unclear. 
 
4
Applicant’s relatives do not live in a Taliban-held area, but their city has been a target of terrorism. 
 
5
The fiancé(e) K-1 nonimmigrant visa is for the foreign-citizen fiancé(e) of a U.S. citizen. The K-1 visa 
permits the foreign-citizen fiancé(e) to travel to the United States and marry his or her U.S. citizen 
sponsor within 90 days of arrival. The foreign citizen will then apply for adjustment of status to a 
permanent resident with the Department of Homeland Security’s U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services. See www.state.gov; www.uscis.gov. 
  
6
In its December 2012 FORM, the Government indicated that the available facts do not show how long 
Applicant’s spouse has lived in the United States, her precise immigration status, or whether she has ever 
returned to Afghanistan. When interviewed on January 19, 2012, Applicant indicated that his then fiancée 
was coming to the United States permanently on a fiancée visa on January 20, 2012. (Item 6C.) In 
response to the SOR, Applicant related that his fiancée “got to the states on January 2012.” (Item 3.) It 
may be inferred that she arrived in the United States on Friday, January 20, 2012, or shortly thereafter. 
So, she has lived in the United States for the past year after entering on a K-1 visa. Consistent with that 
visa, she and Applicant married within 90 days of her entry. Her status appears to be that of a lawful 
nonimmigrant (resident alien). As of January 23, 2013, the application to adjust her status to U.S. 
permanent resident had not been filed. (AE A.) 
 
7
Applicant has not explained why the Form I-485, Application to Register Permanent Resident or to Adjust 
Status, has not been filed with the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. 
 
 7 
future. She is in contact with them two or three times a month. To Applicant’s 
knowledge, she does not discuss his work with her parents. (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant is proud to be a U.S. citizen. (Item 6C.) He has been careful to practice 
operational security (OPSEC) since he began his defense contractor employment. (AE 
A.) A U.S. military brigade commander, for whom Applicant served as a lead linguist at 
a combat outpost in Afghanistan starting March 2, 2012, gave his highest 
recommendation for Applicant as of July 25, 2012. Applicant had displayed complete 
loyalty to coalition forces and earned the trust of his team. This lieutenant colonel found 
Applicant to be “fit, intelligent, and professional,” as well as a “phenomenal linguist,” 
able to convey messages from his supervisors to individuals of high rank in both the 
Afghan National Army and the Afghan Uniformed Police. In his opinion, Applicant 
provided “truthful and steadfast service to the United States of America and its 
government.” (AE A.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
After reviewing U.S. government publications concerning Afghanistan and its 
relations with the United States, I take administrative notice of the following facts:8 
 
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since August 19, 1919, after the 
British relinquished control. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In December 1979, Soviet forces invaded and occupied 
Afghanistan. Afghan freedom fighters, known as mujaheddin, opposed the communist 
regime. The resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the 
Geneva Accords, signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet 
Union, which led to the withdrawal of Soviet forces in early 1989. 
 
The mujaheddin were not a party to the negotiations for the Accords and refused 
to accept them. The country remained mired in a civil war. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban 
rose to power, largely due to the anarchy and the division of the country among 
warlords after the Soviet withdrawal. The Taliban sought to impose an extreme 
                                                 
8
The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on 
Afghanistan quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, November 
28, 2011; U.S. Department of State Fact Sheet, U.S. Relations with Afghanistan, September 6, 2012; 
U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011: Afghanistan, May 24, 
2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, 
February 7, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Afghanistan Country Specific 
Information, January 28, 2013; Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the 
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of National Intelligence, February 2, 2012; 
U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 5–Terrorist Safe Havens and 
Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe Havens, July 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, June 27, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, January 29, 2013; U.S. Department of State, 
Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 2–South and Central Asia Overview, July 31, 2012; 
Statement of Joint Chiefs of Staff Before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Iraq and Afghanistan, 
September 22, 2011; and U.S. Department of State, U.S. Declares Haqqani Network a Terrorist 
Organization, September 7, 2012. 
 
 8 
interpretation of Islam on the entire country and committed massive human rights 
violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, to al-Qa’ida 
generally, and to other terrorist organizations. 
 
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Taliban rejected U.S. 
demands that Afghanistan expel Osama bin Laden and his followers. U.S. forces and a 
coalition partnership commenced military operations in Afghanistan in October 2001 
that forced the Taliban out of power by November 2001 and the installation of an interim 
government. President Hamid Karzai assumed the presidency in an October 2004 
democratic election. He was declared president for a second term in November 2009, 
after an election marred by allegations of fraud. Widespread irregularities marred 
September 2010 parliamentary elections, leading to President Karzai’s appointment of a 
special tribunal to adjudicate the disputed election results. 
 
Afghanistan has made significant progress since the Taliban were deposed, and 
the al-Qa’ida core was significantly degraded by the death of Osama bin Laden and 
other key terrorist operatives in 2011. The country still faces many daunting challenges, 
principally defeating terrorists and insurgents; recovering from over three decades of 
civil strife; and rebuilding a shattered physical, economic and political infrastructure. The 
government faces challenges in developing a more effective police force, effective and 
accessible legal system, and subnational institutions to work in partnership with 
traditional and local leaders to meet the needs of the population. Most provinces in 
Afghanistan have established basic governance structures, but they struggle to provide 
essential services. 
 
Human rights abuses persisted in 2011. Armed insurgents committed 
widespread violence, including killings of persons affiliated with the government and 
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The Taliban increasingly used children as suicide 
bombers. Antigovernment elements threatened, robbed, and attacked villagers, 
foreigners, civil servants, and medical and nongovernmental organization (NGO) 
workers. The Afghan National Police and other local security forces were implicated in 
the torture and abuse of detainees and in extrajudicial killings. Other human rights 
problems included pervasive corruption in the judiciary; endemic violence and societal 
discrimination against women and girls; violation of privacy rights; and restrictions on 
freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, religion, and movement. 
 
As of January 28, 2013, NATO and International Security Assistance (ISAF) 
forces were working in partnership with Afghan security forces to combat violent 
extremists and their strategy of terrorist attacks relying largely on assassinations, 
suicide bombings, and improvised explosive devices (IEDs). While the goal of the U.S. 
mission is to transition primary security to Afghan National Security Forces by the end of 
2014, the United States is committed long term to assist Afghanistan in its efforts to 
rebuild its institutions and realize its vision for a country that is stable, democratic, 
economically successful, and committed to the protection of human rights, women’s 
rights, and religious tolerance. Afghanistan and the United States belong to several of 
the same international organizations, most notably the United Nations, International 
 
 9 
Monetary Fund, and World Bank. Afghanistan is also a Partner for Cooperation with the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and is working toward accession 
to the World Trade Organization. On May 2, 2012, the United States and Afghanistan 
signed a 10-year strategic partnership agreement demonstrating the United States’ 
enduring commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s sovereignty, stability, and prosperity, 
and continue cooperation to defeat al-Qa’ida and its affiliates. The agreement also 
signaled the U.S. intent to designate Afghanistan as a major non-NATO ally.  
 
The Afghan government has continued in its efforts to eliminate terrorist safe 
havens and build security, particularly in the country’s south and east, where insurgents 
threaten stability. From their safe havens in Pakistan, insurgent groups, such as the 
Haqqani in North Waziristan and the Afghan Taliban shura in Quetta, stage attacks 
against U.S., Afghan, and Coalition forces in Afghanistan. Insurgents carried out a 
complex attack against multiple targets in Kabul on September 13, 2011, and again on 
April 15, 2012, which included the U.S. Embassy and ISAF headquarters. On 
September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the Haqqani Network a Foreign 
Terrorist Organization. 
 
As of January 28, 2013, the U.S. State Department continues to warn U.S. 
citizens against traveling to Afghanistan in light of its volatile security situation. No 
region in Afghanistan is considered immune from violence, and the potential exists 
throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, against U.S. and 
other Western nationals at any time. Remnants of the former Taliban regime and the Al-
Qa’ida terrorist network, as well as other groups hostile to ISAF military operations, 
remain active. Afghan authorities have a limited ability to maintain order and ensure the 
security of Afghan citizens and foreign visitors. Kabul and its suburbs are considered at 
high risk for militant attacks, including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, direct-fire 
attacks, and suicide bombings. Travel in all areas of the country is unsafe due to military 
combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal 
groups, and the possibility of insurgent attacks, including vehicle-borne or other IEDs. 
There is an ongoing and significant risk of kidnapping and assassination of U.S. citizens 
and NGO employees throughout the country. 
 
U.S. citizens who are also Afghan nationals do not require visas for entry into 
Afghanistan. For U.S. passport holders born in Afghanistan (listed as place of birth on 
the passport), a visa is not required for entry. The Afghan embassy issues a letter 
confirming the nationality of an Afghan citizen for entry into that country. Immigration 
authorities in Afghanistan have implemented a fingerprinting system for all foreign 
visitors upon entry to the country with the exception of diplomats and ISAF personnel 
traveling on official orders. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
 
 10 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
 
 11 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s grandmother, a maternal aunt, at least one uncle, his sister’s 
husband, and Applicant’s parents-in-law are resident citizens of Afghanistan. Applicant’s 
spouse, his father, and one of his brothers, are citizens of Afghanistan living in the 
United States. Three disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The salient issue under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) is whether there is substantial 
evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign influence or exploitation because of the 
respective foreign tie, contact, or interest. The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater 
than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or owning property in a foreign country, but it is nonetheless a relatively low 
standard. The nature and strength of the family ties or other foreign interests and the 
country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a 
likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. Even friendly nations may have 
interests that are not completely aligned with the United States. As noted by the DOHA 
Appeal Board, “the United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 
5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly 
greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is 
associated with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to 
 
 12 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the foreign government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 Applicant has close and continuing bonds of affection and obligation with 
immediate family members (spouse, father, and one brother) who have Afghan 
citizenship. As of January 2012, Applicant lived with his parents and his siblings in a 
home that he owns in the United States. There is no evidence that Applicant moved 
from the home after he married his spouse in January 2012. She may well reside in the 
house with his parents and siblings while he is in Afghanistan for the U.S. military, 
although it is unclear. Applicant’s brother with a green card is a full-time college student. 
Applicant had contact with him three to four times a week as of January 2012.  
Applicant’s contact with his extended family members living in Afghanistan before his 
deployment was infrequent, and since then, it has apparently been non-existent. Yet, he 
visited with his grandmother, aunt, and the uncle who works as a cultural advisor, when 
he traveled to Afghanistan in 2009 and 2010. Applicant stayed with his sister’s spouse 
when he went to Afghanistan for his sister’s wedding in 2009. Applicant saw his brother-
in-law during his subsequent trip to Afghanistan in 2010. Concerning his parents-in-law, 
Applicant first met them in 2009. He stayed with them for about three weeks in 2010 
when he became engaged to their daughter. Since becoming employed by the defense 
contractor, Applicant had not contacted them, although his spouse speaks with her 
parents about two to three times a month. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the 
person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not 
rebutted that presumption. Applicant has sufficiently close relations with foreign family 
members living in Afghanistan, either directly or indirectly (through his spouse to her 
parents and through his sister to her husband), to create a potential conflict of interest 
between his desire to assist family members in Afghanistan and his obligation to protect 
sensitive information. AG ¶ 7(b) applies. 
 
Furthermore, the risk of foreign influence is heightened because of the ongoing 
terrorist activities in Afghanistan. The Afghan-Taliban dominated insurgency continues 
its violent efforts to destabilize the Afghan civilian government and its security forces. In 
addition to the Taliban, al-Qa’ida, other insurgent groups, and anti-Coalition 
organizations continue to operate in Afghanistan, or from safe havens in Pakistan, 
resulting in numerous attacks and deaths. The State Department has declared that the 
security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, and travel in all 
areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, landmines, 
banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, and the possibility of terrorist 
attacks. Those members of Applicant’s family who live in Afghanistan are at risk of 
terrorism on a daily basis. The evidence does not establish that any of Applicant’s family 
members have an obligation to the Afghan government or military. Even so, one uncle 
reportedly works in cultural affairs, which could enhance his visibility. Applicant’s father 
was captured and imprisoned by the Taliban in the past because of his former military 
service for Afghanistan. Applicant and his family in Afghanistan must also be considered 
 
 13 
as potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban because of Applicant’s duties as a 
linguist in support of the U.S. military. Applicant’s potential access to classified 
information could theoretically increase the risk of undue foreign influence. International 
terrorist groups have been known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as 
capable state intelligence services. Disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) also apply.  
 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,” is 
difficult to satisfy, given the ongoing risk of terrorist activity in Afghanistan. Except for his 
parents-in-law, all of Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan live in an area at high 
risk for terrorist violence. 
 
Applicant had infrequent contact with his extended family members in 
Afghanistan, including his parents-in-law and sister’s husband, before he was deployed 
to Afghanistan in early February 2012. As of January 2013, Applicant had not had any 
personal contact with his relatives for about a year, despite his presence in Afghanistan. 
It is unclear whether he is prevented by contract or duty requirements to avoid any 
contact with his and his spouse’s family members in Afghanistan. Yet, it is difficult to 
fully satisfy AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation,” chiefly because of his spouse’s ties to Afghanistan and her ongoing, 
regular contacts with her parents. There is also some indication that Applicant’s brother-
in-law in Afghanistan may be aware of Applicant’s employment as a linguist in 
Afghanistan. Applicant expressed his belief in January 2012 that his brother-in-law knew 
that he would be coming to Afghanistan, although he had shown no undue interest. 
 
A heightened risk of undue foreign influence may be mitigated under AG ¶ 8(b), 
“there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” Applicant credibly denies any loyalty to his native Afghanistan, from which he 
fled in early 2003 for Pakistan and then the United States. The family members to whom 
Applicant is most closely bound by affection or obligation or both all reside in the United 
States. At the same time, it cannot reasonably be said that his sense of loyalty to 
foreign family members is so minimal to qualify for mitigation under the first prong of AG 
¶ 8(b). His spouse, father, and one brother may be faced with completing claims 
because of their Afghan citizenship. Also, Applicant is bound to his parents-in-law in 
Afghanistan through his spouse, who is maintaining close relations to her parents 
through regular telephone calls. 
 
Applicant has persuaded me that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States, however. He left Afghanistan as a youth in 1997. 
 
 14 
He came to the United States as a refugee with his mother and siblings when he was 17 
in April 2003. Applicant finished high school at age 20. He took classes at a community 
college part time over the next three years while working as a host in a restaurant. In 
August 2008, he obtained his U.S. citizenship, and in November 2008, he acquired his 
U.S. passport. From May 2009 through December 2011, he worked as a “value stream 
operator.” In May 2009, he purchased the home in which his family still resides in the 
United States. Little is known about that purchase, including whether he is a co-owner, 
whether he has a mortgage, and if so, who is paying it. Yet, it shows his commitment to 
remain in the United States. He has no financial assets in Afghanistan. So too, his 
sponsorship of his fiancée to come to the United States is consistent with his U.S. 
citizenship. It is unclear why her application to adjust her status to U.S. permanent 
resident has not been filed. 
 
Applicant’s service as a linguist in support of the United States military weighs 
considerably in his favor in assessing whether he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. A lieutenant colonel in command of a 
military brigade, for whom Applicant served as the lead linguist from March 2, 2012 to at 
least July 25, 2012, gives Applicant his highest recommendation. Applicant proved to be 
a “phenomenal” linguist in conveying messages from his supervisors to high-ranking 
personnel in the Afghan National Army and Afghan Uniformed Police. In the opinion of 
the commander, Applicant displayed “complete loyalty to all Coalition forces and earned 
the trust of all those around him.” It must be noted that Applicant’s service to the United 
States has come at some personal cost. Aside from the risk to his own life by choosing 
to serve in a hostile environment, Applicant and his spouse were together as a couple 
for only a few weeks before he left for Afghanistan. Applicant’s connections to the 
United States are more significant than his connections to the extended family members 
living in Afghanistan, and when taken together with his linguist service in support of the 
U.S. military, are sufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B; however, assuming AG ¶ 8(b) is not applicable, security concerns are 
separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).9 Applicant has family ties to Afghanistan that heighten the risk of foreign 
influence. Afghanistan has been mired in conflict for decades, and the country is under 
                                                 
9 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 15 
constant threat of violence from terrorist and extremist groups wanting to sabotage the 
country’s efforts to establish a stable, functioning democracy. With the help of the 
United States and ISAF, the country has made sufficient strides for the United States to 
turn over primary security to the Afghans in late 2014. Nonetheless, the risk of undue 
foreign influence is very real. 
 
  Department Counsel correctly notes in the FORM that Guideline B cases are not 
about Applicant’s loyalty. As stated by the DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-
10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “Application of the guidelines is not a comment on an 
applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member.” Given the circumstances under which Applicant fled 
Afghanistan with his family (his father’s imprisonment by the Taliban), Applicant’s 
decision to serve as a linguist is especially noteworthy. He reports being very careful to 
maintain OPSEC requirements, and to that end, he has not contacted his extended 
family members in Afghanistan since he began his duties as a linguist. The Government 
presented no evidence to undermine that assertion. In rebuttal to the FORM, Applicant 
submitted a recommendation from his brigade commander, who attests to Applicant’s 
“loyal and steadfast” service to the brigade and the United States.” The commander 
expressed his utmost confidence in Applicant and his ability to protect our national 
security. 
 
Although still a relatively young 27, Applicant has had life experiences that have 
led to the maturity and professionalism displayed in fulfilling his duties as a translator.  
As a young refugee in Pakistan, he worked to help his mother support the family. From 
May 2003 until June 2006, he attended high school in the United States when he was 
likely older than most of his classmates and English was not his first language. He 
began working at a local restaurant in June 2004, when he was still in high school. 
Applicant has expressed verbally, and through his actions as a linguist, his appreciation 
for his opportunities in the United States. Applicant is likely to resist and report any 
attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to exploit him or his 
family members. After considering all the facts and circumstances, including that his 
closest family members are in the United States, I find it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 16 
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
