 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07673 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
financial considerations concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 13, 2012. He did not state whether 
he wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On September 20, 2012, Department Counsel requested a 
hearing on the matter. The case was assigned to me on November 26, 2012. The 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
29, 2013, scheduling the hearing for February 26, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 5, 2013.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
HE I. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this 
decision.   
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2011. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He attended community college for a period, but he did not obtain a 
degree. He is married with three children under the age of ten.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan to Afghani parents. His grandmother took him 
and fled to Pakistan in the late 1980s. He remained in Pakistan for several years and 
then went to a European country, where he was granted asylum and eventually 
citizenship. He left the European country in the late 1990s to come to the United States 
and marry his wife. His wife was also born in Afghanistan, but she immigrated to the 
United States before Applicant. She is now a U.S. citizen. Applicant became a U.S. 
citizen in 2008. Their children were born in the United States. Applicant’s grandmother 
also lives in the United States.2 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s mother remarried, but her second husband is also deceased. 
Applicant does not have any siblings, but he has a stepbrother and a stepsister. His 
stepbrother and stepsister are citizens of Afghanistan, but his stepbrother lives in Italy 
and his stepsister lives in Australia. Applicant is estranged from his mother, and he has 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 48; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 44-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
3 
 
not seen her in several decades. He has had almost no contact with his mother or his 
stepsiblings in several years.3 
 
 Applicant worked as a restaurant server in a hotel from 2003 to 2011. His income 
increased until he was making about $80,000 per year. In the early-to-mid 2000s, he 
entered the real estate market. He bought two houses and “flipped” them earning about 
$150,000 on the sales. He bought a third house (House 3) in late 2004 for about 
$500,000, intending the house to be his home. The house was financed with a down 
payment of about $50,000 and mortgage loans. He lived in the house with his family for 
about a year. He placed the house on the market, but it did not sell. He bought another 
house (House 4) in 2006 for about $600,000 and moved into that house. The house 
was financed with a down payment of about $60,000 and mortgage loans. The real 
estate market collapsed. He was unable to pay the mortgage loans, and he could not 
sell the houses for what was owed on the mortgage loans.4 
 
 The holders of the mortgage loans on House 3 agreed to a short sale of the 
property, which took place in March 2008. The property was sold for $365,000. The first 
mortgage loan holder received $330,095; the second received $1,000; and the third 
received $5,000. House 4 was lost to foreclosure. The house was sold in March 2008 
for $359,100.5  
 
 Applicant and his family vacationed in Europe for 15 days in 2009 and for 10 
days in 2010. He stated that his sister-in-law paid the air fares for the second vacation 
and he received discounted hotel rates because he worked for a hotel chain. He bought 
a 2011 minivan in 2011, financed with a loan of about $36,000. He already owned a 
2007 sports utility vehicle (SUV) and two older-model cars that were inoperable or in 
need of major engine repairs.6 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2011. Under Schedule A, Real 
Property, Applicant listed a timeshare with an estimated value of $3,500. Under 
Schedule B, Personal Property, Applicant listed his four vehicles with a total value of 
$48,650 and about another $8,300 in miscellaneous other property. He listed an 
$11,950 loan for his 2007 SUV and a $36,870 loan for his 2011 minivan under Schedule 
D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims. Under Schedule E, Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Priority Claims, he listed three unpaid parking fines of $60, $100, and $50. Under 
Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed 15 
debts totaling $143,134. Included were mortgage loan deficiencies ($67,175 and 
$63,731); credit card debts ($2,557, $2,971, and $2,464); homeowner association dues 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 44, 49-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-37; GE 1, 4; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, D-F. 
 
6 Tr. at 38-41; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
($290); timeshare maintenance fees ($30); insurance premium ($290); check overdraft 
($1,699); and six medical accounts totaling about $1,925.7   
 
 As part of the bankruptcy, Applicant surrendered his 2007 SUV. He reaffirmed 
the car loan on his 2011 minivan. He received financial counseling as a requirement of 
his bankruptcy. His dischargeable debts were discharged in October 2011. He testified 
that he paid his parking fines, and that he is current on his car loan and other bills. He 
did not know whether he still owned the timeshare. He feels that he was victimized by 
the real estate industry “scam” that preyed on individuals’ wishes to become rich. He 
stated that he has learned from the experience and his finances are currently in order.8 
 
 Applicant has been a linguist for a defense contractor since December 2011. He 
has worked under combat conditions in Afghanistan for more than a year. His 
performance evaluations are outstanding and the U.S. military personnel he worked 
with praised his abilities and service to the mission.9 One U.S. service member wrote:  
 
Despite specific threats against [Applicant’s] life, he continued to perform 
his duties admirably. [Applicant] was a respected member of the [U.S. 
military] team, greatly increasing mission effectiveness and earning the 
respect and confidence of everyone around him. [Applicant] spent 
hundreds of hours outside the base, and covered hundreds of miles during 
dismounted patrols. [Applicant’s] performance of his interpreter duties was 
consistently excellent. In terms of his competency, work ethic, motivation, 
and physical fitness, he is the best interpreter I have worked with in three 
deployments.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6; AE C. 
 
8 Tr. at 56-62; GE 5; AE G. 
 
9 AE A, H, I. 
 
10 AE H. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
6 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by 
the evidence.  
 
Applicant’s stepbrother and stepsister are citizens of Afghanistan, but his 
stepbrother lives in Italy and his stepsister lives in Australia. Applicant does not maintain 
contact with his stepsiblings. There are no disqualifying conditions raised by the 
presence of Applicant’s estranged stepsiblings in Italy and Australia. SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan. Applicant is 
estranged from his mother, and he has not seen her in several decades. He is a loyal 
U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous conditions in support of the 
national defense. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
 
7 
 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”11 AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are 
applicable. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
8 
 
  Applicant feels that he is a victim of the real estate industry that preyed on his 
desire to become rich. He bought and sold two houses, earning about $150,000 on the 
sales. Buoyed by that success, he bought a third house for about $500,000, intending 
the house to be his home. Not satisfied with that house, about a year later, he placed 
the house on the market and bought a fourth house for about $600,000. He bought the 
fourth house before the third house was sold. The real estate market collapsed; he 
could not pay the mortgage loans; and he could not sell the properties for what was 
owed. The mortgage holders agreed to a short sale of the third property, and the fourth 
property was lost to foreclosure. Despite that problematic financial history, Applicant 
took his family on European vacations in 2009 and 2010, and he bought a 2011 minivan 
with a car loan of about $36,000. Applicant’s bankruptcy petition also included three 
unpaid parking fines of $60, $100, and $50; a check overdraft of $1,699; and timeshare 
maintenance fees of $30. Applicant does not know whether he still owns the timeshare. 
The collapse of the real estate market was beyond Applicant’s control, but it was not 
completely unforeseeable. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
I find that Applicant has a history of making questionable financial decisions. I am 
unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made 
a good-faith effort to pay his debts.12 His financial issues are recent. I am unable to 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. I find that financial concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s character evidence and particularly his outstanding work 
in Afghanistan under hazardous conditions. However, he has a history of financial 
problems. His debts were discharged in bankruptcy, but I am not convinced that 
additional financial problems will not recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns, but he has not mitigated financial 
considerations concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
