 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-08851 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his past history of financial 
problems. His financial problems were, in part, caused by his wife’s unemployment and 
caring for his ill mother-in-law. Over the past three years, he has either paid or is in the 
process of paying the delinquent debts listed in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), which 
total less than $9,000. He has served for over 40 years as a federal contractor, and has 
always handled and safeguarded classified information in a proper manner. Applicant’s 
long history of safeguarding sensitive information and service to the nation, coupled with 
his resolution of a majority of the debts at issue, mitigates the security concerns raised 
by his past financial situation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 30, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant an SOR, alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a hearing (Answer). 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 18, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed with a hearing. Applicant’s hearing was originally scheduled for 
October 24, 2012, but he requested a delay due to a medical emergency. His request 
for a delay was granted and the hearing was rescheduled for January 15, 2013.1  
 
 At hearing, Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) 
A through C were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
requested additional time to submit further documents. I granted his request and he 
timely submitted Ax. D.2 This exhibit was also admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2013, and the record closed 
on January 31, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old, married, with two adult children. He has been working 
for his current employer since 1972, and has held a security clearance since 1980. He 
is part of the leadership council of his church. (Tr. at 29-30; GE 1; AE C) 
 
 In 2002, Applicant had his debts discharged through bankruptcy. (Answer) No 
evidence was presented regarding the amount or type of debts that were discharged. 
Applicant’s finances remained stable for the next six years.  
 
In 2007, Applicant purchased a home for his 80-year-old mother-in-law. His 
daughter, who was going to live with her grandmother, was supposed to pay a portion of 
the mortgage on this second home. Applicant’s daughter was laid off and was unable to 
pay her portion of the mortgage. The second home was foreclosed. Applicant testified 
that he does not owe anything for the second home after the auction sale and provided 
documentation showing that the property was sold, in 2010, for more than was owed on 
the mortgage. (Tr. at 34-36, 46-48; GE 2, Subject Interview (SI); Ax. D, Atch 8)  
 
Applicant was unaware of the financial problems involving the second home until 
the day he saw his daughter and mother-in-law moving out, which was shortly before 
the house was foreclosed. At the time, his wife was in charge of the finances and kept 
him in the dark about their daughter’s failure to pay her portion of the mortgage. 
Applicant submitted documentation from the lender showing that they addressed issues 
regarding the foreclosure solely to his wife. (Tr. at 34-36, 46-48; GE 2 at 91)  
 
 In 2008, Applicant had liens placed against his properties for unpaid federal 
taxes. Applicant explained that his former accountant misfiled his tax returns, which led 
to the tax liens. Applicant satisfied the tax debt through wage garnishment and the liens 
were released. He fell behind on his bills as a result of the decrease in household 
                                                          
1
 Although Applicant did not receive the official Notice of Hearing until January 4, 2013, he 
received actual notice of the rescheduled hearing date more than 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 7-9) 
 
2
 For clarity, I have renumbered the Attachments (Atch) to Ax. D, Atch 1 through 8.  
 
3 
 
 
income occasioned by the garnishment, his wife’s unemployment, and caring for his ill 
mother-in-law. (Tr. at 31-34; GE 1; GE 2 at 93-98)3 
 
 In 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) for his 
periodic reinvestigation. He disclosed the foreclosure and tax debt, as well as a 
judgment for $3,651 and a delinquent phone bill for approximately $300. (GE 1) The 
judgment is referenced in SOR ¶ 1.a, and Applicant submitted proof that he has been 
paying at least $100 a month per agreement with the creditor since August 2010. (Ax. 
D, Atch 1) The phone bill is referenced in SOR ¶¶ 1. j and 1.l. Applicant denies he owed 
the bill, but paid it to resolve the debt. (Tr. at 45-46; GE 2, SI at 2; Ax. D, Atch 5) 
 
 Applicant’s remaining nine SOR debts total less than $6,000. He paid or is 
paying the five medical debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.f, totaling approximately $1,250. 
(Tr. at 40-42; Ax. D, Atch 2-3; Answer) He paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i, which 
together total about $1,480. (Ax. D, Atch 3-4) He contests the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, and 
submitted a dispute with one of the credit reporting agencies. (Ax. D, Atch 6) The last 
SOR debt that remains unresolved is a charged-off credit card account for less than 
$750. Applicant has contacted the creditor and is attempting to resolve this last SOR 
debt. (Tr. at 45; Ax. D; Answer) 
 
 Applicant recognizes that he is partly to blame for his past financial problems, 
because he did not keep an eye on his finances and relied entirely on his wife to 
manage their finances. He now keeps a close eye on their finances. He has not 
accumulated any other delinquent debt and meets his current financial obligations. (Tr. 
at 36, 48-53) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
                                                          
3
 Although Applicant’s tax debt was not alleged in the SOR, I considered it in determining whether 
he mitigated the financial considerations concern. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (unalleged tax debt may be considered in assessing an applicant’s mitigation case).  
 
4 
 
 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility, which has resulted in bankruptcy, 
foreclosure, and a number of delinquent accounts raise this concern. It also establishes 
the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”4 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility raises a significant concern. 
However, over the past three years, he has either paid or is in the process of satisfying 
the delinquent debts he accumulated as a consequence of his wife’s unemployment and 
paying for his ailing mother-in-law’s medical bills. Arguably, Applicant should have 
addressed his delinquent debts more promptly. Yet, he has prudently addressed his 
debts in a methodical fashion over the past three years with the limited means he has 
had at his disposal and only two debts remain unresolved as of the close of the record.5 
As for the two remaining unresolved SOR debts, Applicant has challenged one through 
the formal dispute process and contacted the creditor to resolve the other debt. He is 
aware that resolution of these debts is paramount to retaining his security clearance. 
More importantly, based on his three-year track record of debt resolution, he will resolve 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
5
 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“an applicant is not required to be 
debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required 
is that an applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to 
effectuate the plan”). 
 
6 
 
 
these last two debts. Furthermore, he no longer relies on his wife to manage their 
financial affairs and now stays on top of their finances. As a result, he has not amassed 
any other delinquent debt. He dispelled the concerns raised by his history of financial 
trouble. AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 Applicant has worked for a defense contractor for over 
40 years and held a clearance without issue since 1980. He voluntarily disclosed his 
financial problems on the SCA and then set out to resolve his debts. He demonstrated 
the honesty and personal responsibility the Government expects from those granted 
access to classified information. These favorable whole-person factors, coupled with the 
mitigating conditions noted above, leaves me convinced that he can continue to be 
entrusted with classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
