 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02302
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On December 3, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, where he works as an armed security officer. After reviewing the
results of Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories  regarding1
information in his background. Based on the results of the background investigation and
his response to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered4
in support of the government’s case.
2
preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to2
grant Applicant’s access to classified information. On May 15, 2009, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial3
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct).
On June 2, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision
without a hearing. On June 15, 2009, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant4
received the FORM on June 26, 2009, and timely responded to the FORM in a two-
page handwritten letter dated June 26, 2009. The case was assigned to me on July 17,
2009.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant owed approximately $16,283 for 17 delinquent
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.q. In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted without
explanation all of these allegations. The government also alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that
Applicant deliberately made a false statement to the government when he answered
“no” to e-QIP questions 28.a (debts more than 180 days past due in the past seven
years) and 28.b (currently more than 90 days past due on any financial obligation). He
denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP. In addition to the facts entered in the record
through Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 46-year-old high school graduate. Since August 2008, he has
worked as an armed security guard for a defense contractor. Between 2000 and 2008,
he held a variety of jobs, including other security guard positions. This appears to be his
first application for a security clearance. (FORM, Item 4)
Applicant has never been married, but has four children of his own (ages 10, 8,
8, and 5). He also lives with his girlfriend and her 7-year-old child. (FORM, Item 4)
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he answered “no” to all of the questions pertaining
to his finances (debts, bankruptcy, garnishments, etc.) However, a credit report
obtained during his background investigation showed he was delinquent or seriously
past due on numerous debts totaling in excess of $16,000. Two of the unpaid debts
(SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l) are for past due child support and total $7,908. Of the remaining
debts, seven (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d - 1.h) are for unpaid medical accounts totaling in
excess of $4,000. The remaining debts are for unpaid personal credit accounts,
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
including one delinquent credit card and several unpaid cell phone, cable television, and
internet service accounts. (FORM, Items 6 and 7) The debts documented in the FORM
became delinquent as far back as October 2003 and as recently as December 2008.
(FORM, Items 6 and 7) All but two of the debts listed in the SOR have been placed for
collection.
On April 21, 2009, Applicant responded to interrogatories from DOHA
adjudicators. The questions therein sought additional information about the debts
contained in his credit reports. The interrogatories also asked Applicant to provide a
personal financial statement (PFS) listing his monthly income and expenses. His PFS
showed that his monthly expenses, which did not include any payments to any of the
debts listed in the SOR, exceeded his monthly income by about $390. (FORM, Item 5)
Applicant claimed that he did not intentionally omit his debts from his e-QIP. In
response to the SOR, he asserted that he “answered no because [he] did not know
what was on [his] credit report.” (FORM, Item 3)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concern and adjudicative factors under AG ¶ 15
(Guideline E - personal conduct) and AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - financial considerations).
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in the
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.q. Further, Applicant admitted each of the alleged debts, which total
more than $16,000. Applicant’s indebtedness spans at least the past six years, and it
appears from the negative monthly cashflow reflected in his PFS that he does not have
the means to pay any of his debts. Available information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(e) (consistent
spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness,
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis).
In response, Applicant has not shown that he is attempting to pay or resolve his
debts. He has not explained how he came to experience his financial problems, and he
has not demonstrated that he has done anything, such as obtain financial counseling or
5
other professional guidance, to improve his financial standing. Finally, he has not
indicated that he is disputing any of debts attributable to him in the government’s
information. Accordingly, none of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20 apply and
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns established by the government’s
information about his finances. 
Personal Conduct.
The government also alleged that Applicant deliberately made false statements
to the government by withholding adverse information about his finances when he
answered “no” to e-QIP questions 28.a and 28.b. If proven, this allegation raises a
security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct expressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Because Applicant denied this allegation, Department Counsel was required to
present “evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.”
(Directive, E3.1.14) Here, the evidence is largely circumstantial – Applicant did not list
any of his delinquencies in his e-QIP, but the government’s credit reports show he has
owed numerous debts for more than 90 or 180 days. I conclude that all of the
information, circumstantial or not, bearing on the issue of Applicant’s intent shows he
tried to hide his financial problems when he submitted his e-QIP. Even if he did not
know all of the information about his debts, it defies common sense for Applicant to
claim that he did not know he was delinquent on some of his obligations within the
meaning of both e-QIP questions. At the very least, a state child support agency was
seeking resolution of his unpaid support obligations, and all but two of his other
creditors were collection agencies with whom it is reasonable to infer that Applicant has
had some contact. At the very least, a “yes” answer to either question would have put
the government on notice of Applicant’s financial problems.
Based on the foregoing, this record requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities). In response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant has
presented no information that would support any of the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions.
Nor has given the government any reason to conclude that his trustworthiness and
candor would not be suspect should he be given a security clearance. Accordingly, I
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns about his personal
conduct.
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
6
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 47 years
old and presumed to be a mature adult. However, the weight of the information
presented shows he has failed to meet his financial obligations over the past several
years, and that he was untruthful about those obligations in his application for
clearance. There is no information in this record about any other facet of his background
that sufficiently counters the adverse information underlying the security concerns about
his finances. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information bearing9
on Applicant’s finances shows he has failed to address satisfactorily the government’s
doubts about his suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of
the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be
resolved in favor of the government.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
