 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03399 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On August 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility - Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 ((SF 86), dated October 2, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, notarized August 18, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 Because he had failed to admit or deny certain allegations in the SOR there 
was an exchange of e-mails later that month until complete responses could be 
obtained. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on October 15, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 28, 2014. A response was due on November 27, 2014, 
but as of December 4, 2014, he had not submitted any response. The case was 
assigned to me on December 5, 2014. As of the date of this decision, no response had 
been received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, including his subsequent e-mails, Applicant denied 
three of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.c.). In response to three other allegations (¶¶ 1.k., 1.l., and 1.o.) he 
responded that arrangements were being made to satisfy or pay the respective 
accounts. His responses to the remaining allegations were “satisfied/removed” with a 
date. Although Department Counsel construed those responses as admissions of those 
respective allegations, because the dates provided by Applicant predated the SOR, I 
consider the responses to be denials. However, as to the allegations for which 
arrangements were being made, I construe those responses as admissions. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a driver with his current employer since January 2012.3 He was previously 
unemployed from December 2011 until January 2012.4 His education is unknown. He 
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 18, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
3 
                                      
 
has never served with the U.S. military.5 He has never held a security clearance.6 
Applicant was married in November 1996, and divorced in May 1997.7  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 It is unclear when or why Applicant’s finances became so unmanageable that he 
was unable to maintain his monthly payments, resulting in some of his accounts 
becoming delinquent and placed for collection as early as 2007. The SOR identified 17 
purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling approximately $18,889 that had been 
placed for collection, as reflected by a December 2013 credit report.8 Of the 17 
accounts listed, 14 are delinquent medical accounts.  
 
Applicant indicated that he had satisfied and removed one $500 medical account 
(SOR ¶ 1.m.) in March 2014; one $306 medical account (SOR ¶ 1.n.) in May 2014; 
three medical accounts for $5,875 (SOR ¶ 1.i.), $1,128 (SOR ¶ 1.j.), and $8,635 (SOR ¶ 
1.q.) in June 2014; one $115 telephone account (SOR ¶ 1.p.) in June 2014; and five 
medical accounts for $218 (SOR ¶ 1.d.), $251 (SOR ¶ 1.e.), $101 (SOR ¶ 1.f.), $50 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.), and $66 (SOR ¶ 1.h.) in July 2014. He added that one $50 medical 
account (SOR ¶ 1.o.) would be paid by September 1, 2014; that arrangements were 
being made to pay off one $672 credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.k.); and that 
arrangements were being made to satisfy one $359 medical account (SOR ¶ 1.l.). The 
only evidence regarding the status of Applicant’s handling of those accounts is his 
written comments on the SOR. He failed to submit any documentation such as receipts, 
cancelled checks, account records, etc., to support his contentions that those accounts 
were either already resolved or that repayment arrangements had been agreed to. As to 
Applicant’s comments that the items had been removed, it is unclear from what or 
where they had been removed.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had been “working hard to 
clean up [his] credit, and maintain a good credit history, and will continue to do so.”9 
Applicant’s credit history has not been good.10 There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant ever received financial counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial 
resources may be because he did not submit a personal financial statement to indicate 
                                                          
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 25. 
 
7
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
8
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated December 7, 2013). 
 
9
 Item 4, supra note 2, at 6. 
 
10
 When Applicant completed his SF 86 in October 2013, he indicated that in the past seven years he had 
not had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency or that he was or is currently over 120 days delinquent 
on any debt. Considering the information appearing in his credit report, it appears that his characterization of his 
financial history was not accurate. The information regarding Applicant’s SF 86 responses and false characterization 
of his financial history was not alleged in the SOR and will not be considered as disqualifying, except that it will be 
significant to the whole-person analysis appearing below. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
his net monthly income, his monthly household or debt expenses, or whether or not he 
has any funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial problems are now under 
control. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”11 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”13 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
                                                          
11
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
12
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
13
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.14  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”15 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”16 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
                                                          
14
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
16
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
started as early as 2007. He found himself with insufficient funds to continue making his 
routine monthly payments and various accounts became delinquent, and were placed 
for collection.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”17  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. The nature, frequency, and 
recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 2007 make it difficult 
to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant was 
previously unemployed from December 2011 until January 2012, but that period came 
several years after his initial financial problems. He offered no evidence of a good-faith 
effort to resolve any of his debts and essentially ignored them until 2014. As noted 
above, he failed to submit any documentation such as receipts, cancelled checks, 
account records, etc., to support his contentions that his delinquent accounts were 
either resolved or that repayment arrangements had been agreed to in 2014. As to 
Applicant’s comments that the items had been removed, it is unclear from what or 
where they had been removed. 
  
                                                          
17
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any 
funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has 
not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, 
if any, efforts of working with his creditors.18 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.19 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.20   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He was 
unemployed from December 2011 until January 2012. He has declared his intention of 
cleaning up his credit and maintaining a good credit history.  
  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s long-standing failure to repay creditors between 2007 and 2014, or to 
                                                          
18
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
19
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
20
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he 
has any funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. 
Thus, there are no indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
Applicant has simply made the assertions that his delinquent accounts were either 
resolved in 2014, that repayment arrangements had been agreed to, or that other 
accounts had been removed. In the absence of documentation to support his 
assertions, in light of his failure to accurately portray the true status of his finances in his 
SF 86, little weight can be given to those assertions. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Considering the relative absence of confirmed debt resolution and 
elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:21 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.’ However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has ‘. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.’) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his debts.  Overall, the evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
21
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
