 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-01998   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised by his unresolved delinquent debt and his deliberate falsification of a 
June 2011 security clearance application. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. Department 
Counsel served Applicant with a copy of discovery and an amended SOR in October 
2014.2 The amended SOR added eight allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.m) under the 
financial considerations guideline and two allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.b) under the 
personal conduct guideline. Applicant timely responded to the amended SOR, 
answering each new allegation. At the hearing on April 13, 2015, I amended the SOR, 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE E, which was 
also admitted without objection.3 I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 35, has worked as an electronics technician for a federal contractor 
since June 2011 and submitted a security clearance application around the same time. 
The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant is indebted to 13 creditors for 
approximately $21,600; and that he omitted derogatory information about his 
employment history from the security clearance application.4 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant was medically retired from the Air Force after nine years 
of active-duty service. Applicant, the only source of income for his family, was not 
prepared for the sudden loss of income. After his retirement, Applicant attended school, 
earning a diploma in aviation mechanics in August 2009. He financed his education with 
student loans and worked sporadically. After graduating, Applicant was unemployed for 
two months before securing employment as an aviation mechanic with a federal 
contractor. Applicant held the job for six days before he resigned.5  
 
 While attending the two-week orientation class for the federal contracting job, 
Applicant’s teacher engaged the students in a conversation about a failed domestic 
terrorist attack. Applicant believes that the teacher found his opinion on the issue 
offensive. He was then called into a meeting with security about his comments. 
Applicant testified that he was given the option to resign or be terminated, though he 
claims that he did not believe that he would be fired that day. Upset by the accusations 
and how his employer handled the situation, Applicant resigned that day. A month later, 
a source informed the FBI that Applicant made statements advocating acts of terrorism. 
Applicant was never interviewed by the FBI, and did not learn about the tip until he 
received the discovery in preparation for the security clearance hearing. Applicant 
denies making any statements supporting terrorism. Applicant testified that in response 
                                                          
2 The SOR amendment and discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and HE 
II, respectively.  
 
3 The Government’s response to Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
4 Tr. 20-21; GE 1-6. 
 
5 Tr. 21-22. 
 
3 
 
to the teacher’s inquiry, he stated that the matter did not concern him because his family 
was not near the location of the thwarted attack.6  
 
 Applicant quickly found other employment and has since been employed without 
interruption. However, Applicant testified that the subsequent positions did not pay a lot 
of money. Before accepting his current position, Applicant worked as a civilian 
employee of the Air Force from March 2010 to June 2011. He decided to transition into 
a contractor position because he believed he would be able to earn more money. Upon 
applying for the job, Applicant was required to complete a security clearance 
application. In response to questions about his employment history, Applicant did not 
disclose his 2009 resignation from the other federal contracting job. He did not consider 
the circumstances of his resignation unfavorable.7 
 
 For the majority of their 15-year marriage, Applicant’s wife has not worked 
outside the home because she did not earn enough money when employed to cover the 
cost of the childcare for their two children. When their youngest child started school in 
August 2014, Applicant’s wife entered the work force with a job earning $27,000 
annually. Anticipating an $800 increase in income each month, Applicant’s wife, who 
handles the family finances, began setting up payment plans to address their delinquent 
accounts. They made one payment toward the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,897) 
before Applicant’s wife lost her job in October 2014. She found another job in February 
2015, but was fired in March 2015 for absenteeism — she missed four days of work to 
care for one of their sick children. Applicant’s wife continues to look for employment. 
She is also in school, working towards a master’s degree. She is financing her 
education with student loans.8  
 
 With his salary, retirement, and disability income totaling approximately $3,800 
each month, Applicant is able to pay the recurring household expenses. However, with 
only $80 in disposable income each month, he is unable to address the delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR. His student loan accounts, which total $70,000, are 
currently in forbearance. To date, Applicant has only resolved SOR ¶ 1.j ($295). The 
other debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. Six of the debts alleged in the SOR 
(¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.m) predate Applicant’s retirement from the military. These 
accounts, totaling $11,200, were opened between 2004 and 2007. The remaining seven 
debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent between February 2010 and June 2011.9  
 
 Despite being unable to address his delinquent accounts, Applicant has taken 
other steps to rehabilitate his finances. In hopes of buying a home, Applicant and his 
wife attended financial counseling classes in August 2014 and February 2015. He is 
actively working to reduce his recurring household expenses. Applicant believes the 
                                                          
6 Tr. 24-27, 59, 63-68; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. 27-28, 59-60, 62; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. 31-34, 47, 50-51, 71-72: AE A.   
 
9 Tr. 37, 54-56; GE 2, 4-6; AE B, E. 
 
4 
 
proposed changes to his budget will yield an additional $250 in monthly disposable 
income. He plans to use the expected surplus to make payments of $100 each on SOR 
¶¶ 1.k ($1,156) and 1.l ($1,068) beginning in May 2015. He plans to make additional 
payments as he is able and hopes that when his wife returns to work, they can apply 
her income to the resolution of their delinquent accounts.10  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
                                                          
10 Tr. 52, 74-76; AE E. 
 
5 
 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $21,600 on 13 delinquent accounts. The 
allegations are supported by the record, establishing the government’s prima facie case. 
Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his bills and a history of financial 
problems resulting in unresolved delinquent debts.12 Applicant blames his financial 
problems on his unexpected medical retirement from the Air Force in 2007 and his 
subsequent history of underemployment and unemployment while having to support his 
family of four. While Applicant’s financial problems may have been exacerbated by his 
medical retirement, the record shows that his financial problems began well before that 
event. The record also shows that between 2010 and 2011, despite having steady 
employment, he began to accumulate delinquent debt again.  
 
Applicant receives credit for the steps he is taking rehabilitate his finances; 
however, it is not enough to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Despite going to financial counseling, Applicant’s finances are not under control. He has 
not established a track record of debt repayment or reduction. Applicant has been able 
to resolve only one of the alleged SOR debts, ¶ 1.j, and has made only one payment 
toward the debt alleged in ¶ 1.a. Although the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.h, 
do not appear on the most recent credit report in the record, it is because they are 
uncollectible due the passage of time, not because of any good-faith efforts made by 
Applicant to repay his creditors. Currently, Applicant does not have the ability to repay 
his delinquent accounts. Applicant has stated his intentions to pay his debts in the 
future. However, this promise, no matter how genuine, does not mitigate the security 
concern. None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about his ability to protect classified information.13 The SOR alleges that in 
2009, Applicant made statement tending to support domestic terrorism (SOR ¶ 2.a). The 
basis of this allegation, a tip provided to the FBI, on its own, is not sufficient to support a 
negative whole-person assessment indicating that Applicant may not properly handle or 
safeguard classified information. Without corroborating evidence, the tip is not reliable 
evidence that Applicant made any questionable statements. Furthermore, there is 
nothing in the record to suggest that the FBI considered the tip credible or actionable. 
There is no evidence that the tip resulted in an investigation; or, that the FBI reached 
any adverse conclusion about Applicant. However, the allegation that Applicant 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
13  See  AG ¶15. 
 
 
6 
 
deliberately failed to disclose the 2009 incident on his security clearance application 
(SOR ¶ 2.b) does raise questions about Applicant’s current security worthiness.  
 
 An applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process raises issues about his reliability and trustworthiness that ultimately 
calls into question his ability to protect classified information.14 Applicant denies having 
any intent to deceive or mislead the government; however, his explanation is not 
credible.  
 
Applicant, after making statements about a failed terrorist attack that his co-
worker deemed so offensive that she reported Applicant to management, was given the 
opportunity to resign or be fired. These circumstances cannot be described as anything 
other than unfavorable. With its clear and unambiguous language, a reasonable person 
would have disclosed the 2009 resignation as leaving a job under unfavorable 
conditions. Applicant, on the other hand, had motivation to omit the information from his 
security clearance application. He wanted a job earning more money. Disclosing 
adverse information involving allegations that he supported domestic terrorism may 
have negatively impacted the likelihood of his getting the job he desired and his being 
granted access to classified information. This motive provides sufficient circumstantial 
evidence of Applicant’s intent to withhold information from the government.15 The 
falsification is not mitigated by the fact that the underlying incident does not negatively 
impact his current security worthiness. An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, 
and candid answers throughout the investigative process. Anything less provides a 
rational basis for a finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. None of the 
personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. The concerns raised by 
Applicant’s finances and his deliberate falsification of his June 2011 security clearance 
application remain and must be resolved in favor of the Government.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i, 1.k – 1.m: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
                                                          
14 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
15 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
7 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
