 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13507 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, and 
after evaluating the evidence in light of the appropriate adjudicative guideline and the 
whole-person concept, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 12, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, on February 27, 2013. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2013, and requested a decision on 
the written record. Pursuant to Section E3.1.7 of the Directive, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). On May 8, 2013, the case was assigned to me. I convened a 
hearing on June 26, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called 
no witnesses and introduced eight exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through Ex. 8 and 
entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified, called no witnesses, and 
introduced 29 exhibits, which were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through 
Ex. Z and Ex. AA through Ex. CC. Applicant withdrew Ex. I. Applicant’s remaining 28 
exhibits were entered in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I 
left the record open until close of business on July 8, 2013, so that Applicant could, if 
she wished, provide additional information. Applicant timely filed three additional 
exhibits, which I marked as Ex. DD, Ex. EE, and Ex. FF and admitted without objection. 
Applicant’s e-mail communication with Department Counsel about her post-hearing 
exhibits is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Department Counsel’s transmittal e-mail 
advising he had no objection to the post-hearing submission is marked as HE 2. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 8, 2013. 
  
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR dated February 27, 2013 contains two allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two allegations. On March 28, 2013, 
Department Counsel amended the SOR to include two additional allegations under 
Guideline F. Applicant admitted the two new allegations in the amended SOR. Her 
admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
   
 Applicant is 48 years old. She has been married and divorced twice, and she is 
the mother of three adult children, all of whom are self-sufficient. In 1996, after her first 
divorce, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy when she and her ex-husband were 
unable to pay their accumulated debts. (Ex. 1, Ex. 3.) 
 
 In 2002, Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree. She is currently employed as an 
independent contractor by a government contracting company. As an independent 
contractor, she is responsible for withholding and then paying her state and federal 
income taxes. She must also provide her own health insurance. These financial 
obligations are not deducted from her pay by her employer. She has worked for her 
present employer since 2011. However, her status as an independent contractor is 
recent, and she previously received a taxable salary and benefits from this employer. In 
a post-hearing document, she stated that she will have an option to again become a 
salaried employee on September 1, 2013. (Ex. 1, Ex.3, Ex. EE; Tr. 94-95, 121-123.) 
 
 Applicant worked as a term employee for a federal government department for 
one year, beginning in March 2009, and during that employment, she applied for a 
security clearance. It was her understanding that her term appointment would be 
 
3 
 
 
renewed for two more years. In an interview with an authorized investigator in October 
2009, she acknowledged approximately 18 delinquent debts and asserted she was 
unable to pay them. She acknowledged a voluntary repossession of a motorcycle, with 
a deficiency of $12,000, which she was unable to pay.1 Additionally, she acknowledged 
an outstanding debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of $2,400 for tax years 2004 
and 2006.2 She was granted an interim security clearance, which was later rescinded. 
(Ex. 3, Ex. O; Tr. 72-73.) 
 
 Applicant’s security clearance was not granted in 2009. Applicant claimed she 
was not timely informed of her opportunity to respond to the agency’s initial decision to 
deny her clearance, and she was therefore unable to provide information to rebut or 
mitigate allegations of financial delinquency. Additionally, her employment with the 
department ended before the matter of her security clearance eligibility could be 
resolved. (Ex. O; Tr. 72-73, 95-98.) 
 
 Applicant reported that the contract renewing her temporary appointment was 
incorrectly coded, with the result of putting her in non-pay status for three weeks. In an 
attempt to remedy this, the agency responsible for payroll gave Applicant a lump-sum 
check for $17,000. Applicant’s command and the payroll agency advised her to cash the 
check and deposit it in a savings account until the overpayment could be resolved. Two 
weeks later, Applicant was terminated when her employer experienced a budget cut 
and could no longer employ her. Applicant’s debt was later referred to the Department 
of the Treasury (agency) for collection, which took action to collect the debt by 
garnishment. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owes the agency a debt of 
approximately $7,000 that is 90 days or more past due. (Ex. Y; Tr. 74-77.) 
 
 Applicant believed that the decision to garnish her wages was taken without 
giving her the benefit of due process. She contested the amount of the debt and 
complained that she was not provided with forms to defer repayment. The agency 
granted her request for an administrative hearing. (Ex. Y; Tr. 99-104.) 
 
 After review of her case, the agency, on October 15, 2012, found no evidence 
that Applicant requested forms to defer payment of her debt. Additionally, it found that 
she informed the agency she had agreed to pay her former employer approximately 
$240 a month for 36 months, beginning in September 2011, to settle the debt, but no 
payments were received and the repayment agreement was cancelled in February 
2012. (Ex. Y.) 
 
                                            
1 Credit bureau reports in the record indicate Applicant addressed many of the delinquent debts identified 
in her personal subject interview. (Ex. 4, Ex. 5, Ex. 6, Ex. 7.) 
 
2 Applicant provided a statement from the IRS, dated March 12, 2012, showing that she was credited with 
an overpayment of $875.97 on her 2009 federal tax return. The IRS report noted that $788.54 of the 
overpayment was applied to a 2004 tax delinquency that Applicant owed, and $87.43 was applied to a 
2006 tax delinquency she owed. These delinquencies were not alleged on the SOR. (Ex. N.)   
 
4 
 
 
 When Applicant did not resolve the debt before it became delinquent, it was 
referred to the agency for collection by garnishment. Applicant did not timely file a 
request for a hearing, and the garnishment process began. Additionally, two income tax 
refunds, one for $131.41 and one of $368.20, were intercepted and applied to the debt. 
The total debt, including interest, penalties, and fees, was $9,2533 as of October 15, 
2012, the date of the administrative decision. (Ex. Y.) 
 
 At her hearing, Applicant testified that she made a payment of $3,800 on the debt 
on June 21, 2013, five days before her hearing. She also testified that she planned to 
pay the remainder of the debt, which she estimated to be “a little over $4,000,” by July 
22, 2013. (Tr. 104-105.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant is responsible for a state tax lien of 
$5,582. The record reflects that the lien was filed in August 2011. The amended SOR 
also alleges at ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d that Applicant failed to file her 2007, 2008, and 2009 
state and Federal income tax returns as required. Applicant stated that she thought she 
was not obligated to file a tax return if she also thought she would receive a tax refund. 
At her hearing, she acknowledged that she had not consulted a tax advisor or received 
recent financial credit counseling. (Tr. 114-115.) 
 
Applicant filed her Federal income tax returns for 2007, 2008, and 2009 in 
January 2012. She filed her 2007, 2008, and 2009 state tax returns in December 2012, 
and she explained at her hearing that they were being reviewed by the state tax 
authority. She stated that she believed the tax authority would find she did not owe the 
amount identified in the lien, and she anticipated that she would be credited with 
refunds. She estimated that once the refunds for the three tax years were credited, she 
would owe approximately $4,354. She provided documentation showing she had 
entered into an installment agreement to pay her 2007, 2008, and 2009 state income 
taxes. However, she stated that she intended to pay the debt in full before the end of 
the installment period. (Answer to SOR; Ex. C, Ex. D, Ex. E, Ex. F., Ex. G, Ex. H, Ex. 
AA, Ex. 8; Tr. 85, 105-113.)  
 
At her hearing, Applicant testified that she had not lived beyond her means for 
four years. She stated that her employer would hire her as an employee if she acquired 
a security clearance. She provided a personal financial statement, dated December 17, 
2012, which reported the following: total net monthly income, $5,564; total monthly 
expenses, $2,709; and total monthly debt payments, $450.4 Applicant’s net remainder 
each month was $2,405. She reported that she had no assets. (Ex. 2; Tr. 87, 118.) 
  
                                            
3 Applicant was notified in January 2010 that the outstanding debt was $9,512.36. As she was still 
working for her employer until February 27, 2010, $1007.54 was collected during that time by payroll 
deduction and applied to the reduction of the debt, resulting in an uncollected debt balance of $8,504.82. 
(Ex. Y.)  
 
4 Applicant’s personal financial statement did not include payments on the state tax lien or the debt to the 
Federal government agency. (Ex. 2.)  
 
5 
 
 
In a post-hearing submission, she provided a personal financial statement that 
reflected her status as an independent contractor. After her hearing, she consulted with 
an accountant who advised her on the amount of money she should set aside each 
quarter to pay her state and federal income taxes. She also provided a plan for paying 
the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. (Ex. DD.) 
 
Applicant provided several letters of character reference for the record. Her 
current supervisor stated that Applicant “demonstrates the highest level of trust and 
integrity” in carrying out her assigned duties. The supervisor also praised Applicant’s 
efforts as a community volunteer. (Ex. CC.) 
 
Three other individuals who knew Applicant as a coworker over a period of 
several years praised her professional skills and strong work ethic. They also noted that 
she possessed high moral character and was trustworthy. (Ex. CC; Ex. FF.)  
 
                            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes three conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns as required” can also be a matter of security concern. 
  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has a history of financial difficulties. In 1996, she filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy when she and her ex-husband divorced and were unable to pay their 
accumulated debts. After receiving a fresh start through the discharge of her debts in 
bankruptcy, she failed to timely file her state and Federal income tax returns in 2007, 
2008, and 2009. Also, in 2009, when she applied for a security clearance, Applicant’s 
credit bureau report reflected that she was responsible for numerous unresolved 
financial delinquencies, which she admitted when interviewed by an authorized 
investigator. 
 
To her credit, Applicant addressed many of the delinquencies identified on her 
2009 credit bureau report. However, her failure to address her income tax 
responsibilities resulted in a state tax lien filed against her in 2011. Additionally, she 
remains responsible for a debt to a federal agency, which, while not of her making, 
brought her unearned income that required repayment. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).   
   
Applicant’s efforts to resolve her current financial delinquencies are relatively 
recent. She made a $3,800 payment on the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. five days before 
her hearing, and she provided in a post-hearing submission a plan for future payments. 
However, at this time, it is not clear that Applicant’s financial delinquencies occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current 
reliability and good judgment. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply in this case. 
 
Applicant received a large payment in error from her employer’s pay agent. This 
was a circumstance beyond her control, and AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. However, she 
was advised by her supervisor to put the overpayment in a separate account until the 
matter could be clarified. If this had occurred, she would have been able to remit the 
overpayment in full when it was demanded. The record reflects that Applicant followed a 
payment plan to resolve the debt briefly, but she did not follow through on a later 
payment plan. Her claim of lack of due process before her wages were garnished to pay 
 
8 
 
 
the debt was reviewed by the agency and found to be without merit. In summary, 
Applicant failed to act responsibly when confronted with a situation over which she 
initially had no control. 
 
At her hearing, Applicant stated that she had not had financial credit counseling 
in recent years, and she did not seek counsel from an accountant or an attorney before 
failing to timely file her state and Federal income tax returns in 2007, 2008, and 2009. 
After her hearing, she consulted with an accountant and in a post-hearing submission, 
provided tax and debt repayment information from the accountant. However, this new 
information, while no doubt helpful to Applicant, cannot be relied on as an accurate 
predictor of her future actions to manage her income and satisfy her debts. 
 
Applicant’s partial payment of $3,800 on the payroll debt she owes to the agency 
occurred five days before her hearing. The status of her state income tax indebtedness 
remains unresolved because Applicant’s 2007, 2008, and 2009 state income tax returns 
are still under review. Applicant had notice in 2011 that a state tax lien had been filed 
against her. While Applicant receives some credit for her partial payment on her payroll 
debt and her state income tax filings, her delays in initiating resolution do not merit full 
application of AG ¶ 20(d), especially when Applicant’s financial statement suggests she 
has had the resources on hand to satisfy the debts in a more timely manner.     
 
 I conclude that while AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable, AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are applicable only in part. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. She is 
 
9 
 
 
educated and holds a bachelor’s degree. Her supervisor and coworkers consider her to 
be a valued colleague. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. While she has successfully 
addressed many of her financial delinquencies in the past, she has not been able to 
prevent new financial delinquencies, and this raises a security concern. Additionally, 
she has addressed her current financial delinquencies relatively recently. While she 
appears to be determined in her efforts to address her delinquencies in order to obtain a 
security clearance, it is not clear that she will be able to maintain financial stability in the 
future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns about her financial delinquency. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:                                  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b.:                                  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c. and 1.d.:                   Against Applicant 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
