                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                     )  ISCR Case No. 04-08547 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 26, 2003, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On June 2, 2005, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  The 
previous adjudicative guidelines, effective until September 1, 2006, applied to that SOR.  
This case has taken three years to arrive at its current status, and the Procedural 
History section of this Decision sets forth that chronology.  The guideline at issue in 
this part of the case is Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Because the amended SOR 
containing this guideline was issued on August 8, 2006, I apply the previous Guideline E 
to this case also. 
  
 This part of the case occurred because the original administrative judge assigned 
the case denied the Government’s motion to amend the SOR to include two Guideline E 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
allegations.  The Government appealed the case to the DOHA Appeal Board, which 
upheld the favorable decision on the Guideline F allegations, but ordered the Guideline 
E allegations to be considered by another administrative judge.  Therefore, this case is 
a remand by the Appeals Board.   On January 16, 2008, another administrative judge 
entered an Order granting the Government’s Motion to Amend the SOR to add the 
Guideline E allegations.  Applicant was given 30 days from January 16th to answer the 
amended SOR. (Item 9) 
 
Applicant=s receipt for the current SOR is dated February 9, 2008.  He answered 
the SOR in writing on that date.  He denied the allegations and requested a hearing.  
Then, on March 30, 2008, Applicant withdrew the hearing request, and instead, asked 
that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Items 10-12) 
 
On May 13, 2008, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case.  
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant. 
He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on June 19, 2007.  Applicant filed 
a response to the FORM on July 5, 2008. I received the case assignment on July 14, 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
1. SOR issued June 2, 2005. 
 
2. Applicant acknowledged receipt of SOR on June 9, 2005.  He filed his Answer 
on June 24, 2005.  He requested a hearing. 
 
3. On May 5, 2006, and on May 11, 2006, the Department Counsel sent 
Applicant the Government’s discovery package. 
 
4. On May 15, 2006, Applicant withdrew his hearing request and asked for a 
determination on the written record (FORM). (Item 6) 
 
5.  On August 8, 2006, the Government filed its initial FORM in this case.  
 
 6. In the FORM, the Government moved to amend the SOR to add Guideline E 
and two allegations under that guideline.  These amendments were based upon 
documentary evidence the Government had forwarded to the Applicant in 
discovery in May 2006.  
 
 7.  Applicant filed a Reply to the Government’s Initial FORM on September 18, 
2006.  In his Reply, Applicant answered the new allegations the Government had 
moved to add to the SOR.  He objected to the addition of the Guideline 
allegations.  The Government argued that Applicant had been made aware of 
 
3 
 
 
these new security concerns for over a month and had the documents supporting 
these new allegations for over four months. (Item 7) 
 
 8. On October 31, 2006, the first administrative judge assigned to the case 
issued a decision wherein he denied the Government’s Motion to Amend the 
SOR to include the Guideline E allegations. The administrative judge found for 
the Applicant on the Guideline F allegations.  That decision is not included in this 
FORM and I have not read it elsewhere.  The 2005 SOR is Item 1 in this FORM. 
 
 9. On August 30, 2007, the Appeal Board remanded the judge’s decision to 
another administrative judge On appeal the Government did not challenge the 
administrative judge’s favorable finding for Applicant under Guideline F and, thus, 
that portion of the Judge’s decision was affirmed. The Appeal Board remanded 
the decision to:  (a) allow the Government to amend the SOR to add allegations 
under Guideline E; (b) provide Applicant the opportunity to answer the new 
allegations and request a hearing on those new allegations, and (c) 
recommended a second administrative judge be assigned to the case, because it 
appeared the first assigned administrative judge had already prejudged the 
Government’s case under Guideline E.  
 
 10. On October 9, 2007, Applicant received a copy of the Appeal Board’s 
Remand Decision. (Item 10) 
 
 11. On January 16, 2008, the second administrative judge assigned the case 
issued the current Order granting the Government’s motion, and setting an 
Answer date. (Item 9) 
 
12. On February 9, 2008, Applicant submitted his “Response to Amended 
Statement of Reasons”.  Applicant again denied the allegations and provided 
additional information, including a “copy of the results from a voluntary 
personality test”.  With his Response, Applicant requested a hearing to address 
the Guideline E concerns. (Items 10-12) 
 
 13. In light of Applicant’s request for a hearing, the case was transferred to 
another Department Counsel responsible for the region in which the case was to 
be heard. 
 
 14.  On March 30, 2008, Applicant sent a letter retracting his request for a 
hearing and once again wishing to proceed solely on the written record. (Item 12) 
 
 15. On April 14, 2008, the case was transferred back to the original Department    
Counsel for preparation of the Second FORM in this case.   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
16. The Amended SOR reads as follows: 
 
“2. Guideline E: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified 
information.  Available information raising this concern shows that: 
 
a. You falsified material facts in response to allegation 1.c. of the Statement of 
Reasons, dated June 2, 2005, which alleges that “You are indebted to VW Credit Inc. 
(account #803126881), in the approximate amount of $23,404.00, the balance owed 
after resale of your automobile which had been repossessed for nonpayment in October 
2000.  As of November 21, 2003, this debt had not been satisfied,” when in your 
Answer, signed June 24, 2005, you stated that: “I deny the above statement.  The 
account with VW Credit was filed with bankruptcy courts. I contacted VW Credit 
Recovery Department (866)623-8350 spoke with Ron and confirmed this information.  
Balance due after sale of automobile was estimated to be $9,000.00 as reported by Ron 
at VW Credit Recovery Dept.  According to the credit report dated 06-09-2005, this 
account has been closed.”  You knew said response in your Answer was false at the 
time you made it, because you did not include this vehicle and the specific debt with VW 
Credit Inc., to wit: account #803126881, with your bankruptcy petition. 
 
b. You were discharged from the United States military on March 8, 2000, 
because of concerns regarding your judgement (sic) or reliability with regards to 
safeguarding classified national security information or special nuclear information 
material.” (Item 9) 
 
17.  Applicant submitted his Answer to the Amended SOR on February 9, 2008.  He 
denied the allegation of falsification contained in Paragraph 2.a. of the Amended SOR.  
He contends that he had no other information in his possession showing he owed any 
money on a debt for a Volkswagen automobile.  He states his bankruptcy petition shows 
this vehicle being listed on it.  He concludes the debt was discharged in bankruptcy. 
(Items 6 and 7) 
 
18.   Applicant denied the allegation in Paragraph 2.b. of the Amended SOR based on 
the contents of his DD 214 showing an “Honorable Discharge” for a “Personality 
Disorder.”   
 
19. Applicant submitted a Response to the FORM on July 5, 2008.  In that Response 
he requests a minimum of 12 months time within which “to get his financial affairs in 
order.”  He further states his student loans are in “forbearance.”  His other debts he has 
“started to make payments to those as well.”  Applicant does not address or supply any 
information concerning the Guideline E allegations, only the Guideline F allegations 
which were the subject of the original SOR.  
 
 
5 
 
 
20. The administrative judge who rendered a decision in that FORM concluded the 
Guideline F allegations for Applicant, which decision was upheld by the DOHA Appeals 
Board.  Those allegations are not at issue in this Remand Decision. 
 
Remand Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 9, 2008, Applicant denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 2.a, and 2.b, with explanations. In his Response to the FORM dated 
July 5, 2008, Applicant did not address the Guideline E allegations, but instead asked 
for at least 12 months “to get his financial affairs in order.”  He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
1. Applicant is 40 years old and divorced.  According to his SF 86, he has no 
children.  No evidence contained in the file shows he has remarried or has a 
family.  His Response to the current FORM states a denial of his security 
clearance “will be placing (his) family literally homeless at this point.” He works 
for a defense contractor.  In 2006 and 2008, he withdrew his requests for 
hearings and asked for the case to be decided on the written record because he 
was working outside the United States. (Items 5, 12, and 16) 
 
2. Applicant purchased two Volkswagen (VW) automobiles in 1999.  The first          
automobile he purchased in August 1999.  It was the subject of loan #803126881 
from VW Credit, Inc.  This automobile was repossessed for non-payment under 
the loan in 2000.  The balance due was $23,404 as of March 7, 2003.  In a credit 
report dated July 12, 2004, the balance on this repossessed automobile is shown 
as zero. The same amount is shown on the credit report of November 23, 2004.  
On August 4, 2006, the balance for this account is shown as zero.  On two other 
credit reports in the file, including the last one dated April 18, 2008, this account 
is not shown.  (Items 15, 18-23) 
 
3. The second VW car was the subject of loan #803166657.  Applicant bought the 
car in September 1999.  Applicant’s credit reports show a balance due of 
$12,677 on this loan.  Applicant and his wife reaffirmed the debt on this car, and 
when they divorced, she received the car.  Applicant and his wife had a written 
agreement incorporated into the divorce decree allocating the VW car to her.  
(Items 3 and 15) 
 
4. Applicant’s filed a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy on May 1, 2001, which was later 
converted to a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy on May 22, 2001.  Applicant listed 
$220,196.78 in debt to be discharged in that bankruptcy action.  Applicant listed 
the second VW car, loan #803166657, in the bankruptcy.  It was listed on 
Schedule B as personal property.  It was also listed on Schedule C as exempt 
property.  Finally, he listed the car and loan on Schedule D because the VW 
Credit, Inc. was a creditor with a secured claim.  Applicant did not list the first VW 
automobile, loan #803126881, for the repossessed car in the bankruptcy as a 
debt to be discharged.  This loan was listed in Applicant’s Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
 
6 
 
 
in the “Statement of Financial Affairs” section as a repossessed vehicle.   This 
section of the bankruptcy petition is not a list of creditors sought to be discharged 
in the bankruptcy, but is a statement of current financial condition of the 
petitioners.  The bankruptcy was discharged on September 12, 2001. (Items 3 
and 15) 
 
5. Applicant listed the repossession of his VW automobile on his SF 86 as occurring 
on October 31, 2000 (Question 35).  The amount owed he listed as $20,000.  He 
did not list the outstanding balance due as a debt over 180 days delinquent in the 
past seven years (Question 38), nor as a debt on February 26, 2003, as currently 
over 90 days delinquent (Question 39) (Item 16) 
 
6. Applicant gave a written statement to a Government investigator on November 
21, 2003, in which he stated the VW automobile loan #803126881, was 
repossessed.  He further stated that because the vehicle was sold by the 
dealership, “I have no intention in paying the outstanding balance as reflected on 
my CBR (credit bureau report)” His personal financial statement submitted with 
the statement did not show this debt as one which Applicant was paying on a 
monthly basis. (Item 17) 
 
7. Applicant’s Response to the original SOR stated, “The account with VW Credit 
was filed with bankruptcy courts. I contacted VW Credit Recovery Department 
(866)623-8350 spoke with Ron and confirmed this information.  Balance due 
after sale of automobile was estimated to be $9,000.00 as reported by Ron at 
VW Credit Recovery Dept.  According to the credit report dated 06-09-2005, this 
account has been closed.”  This Response was notarized. Applicant represented 
thereby the information contained therein was accurate and true. (Item 6) 
 
8. The U.S. Army administratively separated Applicant on March 8, 2000, with an 
Honorable Discharge on the grounds of a personality disorder.  He served about 
seven years on active duty.  During his active duty service in 1999, Applicant was 
referred to the base mental health clinic for an evaluation.  The report of that 
evaluation, dated September 15, 2003, signed by a clinical psychologist, states 
Applicant was seen five times between July 28, 1999, and January 12, 2000, by 
the psychologist and administered psychological testing.  The testing and 
consultations resulted in a report to Applicant’s commander that he was 
experiencing a “Personality Disorder and recommended a Chapter 5-13 
separation. His testing suggested feelings of being misunderstood, 
unappreciated, and demeaned by others.  As a consequence of discontent and 
possible feelings of entrapment, he may act in a petulant, depressive, and 
passive aggressive manner, criticizing others for what he sees as their lack of 
support.”  Applicant’s prognosis was “fair.”  The psychologist opined Applicant 
had a condition “that could impair his judgment or reliability, particularly in the 
context of safeguarding classified national security information or special nuclear 
information or material.”  Applicant disclosed this consultation on his SF 86 in 
Question 19.  He admitted in his answer to that question that the consultation did 
 
7 
 
 
not relate only to marital, family or grief counseling.  Applicant’s Response to the 
Amended SOR, dated February 9, 2008, states the psychological evaluation was 
not a factor in his administrative discharge, but the reason “was all stimulated 
from personal and family issues.  They were never a part of anything whatsoever 
to do with security concerns.” (Items 10, 13, 14, 16, and 17) 
 
9. Applicant submitted a personality test administered by his current employer on 
August 4, 2006, “to show how well (he is) doing overall.”  This personality test is 
not a psychological evaluation.  The explanation at the beginning of the test 
results states, “This individual chose more socially desirable responses than 
average. This may reflect an accurate self-portrayal, an overly positive self-
concept, or a deliberate presentation of a favorable image.”  The final two pages 
of the personality test list occupational fields for which Applicant might be 
compatible with his personality traits.  Neither part of this personality test is a 
professionally administered psychological evaluation by a licensed clinical 
psychologist or psychiatrist. (Item 10) It is given little weight. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
8 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Remand Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG E2.A5.1.1:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard 
classified information.  The following will normally result in an unfavorable 
clearance action or administrative termination of further processing for 
clearance eligibility: 
 
E2.A5.1.1.1 Refusal to undergo or cooperate with required security 
processing, including medical and psychological testing; or 
 
E2.A5.1.1.2 Refusal to complete required security forms, releases, or 
provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of investigators, 
security officials or other official representatives in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and be disqualifying also include 
“reliable, unfavorable information provided by associates, employers, coworkers, 
neighbors, and other acquaintances” (E2.A5.1.2.1) concerning an Applicant.  
Furthermore, “the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and 
material facts from any personal security questionnaire . .  used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, . . determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness” (E2.A5.1.2.2) may be applicable.  Finally, “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant and material matters to an 
 
9 
 
 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
representative in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination” 
(E2.A5.1.2.3) may be a concern in this case.  
 
Applicant told the Government investigator in November 2003 that his VW 
automobile was repossessed and he had no intention of repaying the outstanding 
balance due on that car loan debt.  In February 2003, Applicant disclosed the 
repossession, the amount ($20,000) of the debt, but not that it was delinquent more 
than 90 and 180 days.  Finally, in his Response to the original SOR, Applicant denied 
the debt owed on that his car. He stated, the debt was included in his 2001 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, and the amount owed according to the VW Credit, Inc. was $9,000, with the 
additional statement that a credit report of June 9, 2005, showed the account was 
closed. The credit report in the FORM, Item 22, dated August 4, 2006, continues to 
show this debt as delinquent.   
 
However, that car loan was not included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001. It 
was merely mentioned as a historical item in the Statement of Financial Condition 
section, not on a schedule of debts to be discharged.  The second VW car Applicant 
bought with his wife was included in the bankruptcy.  The former wife got that car, and it 
continues to appear on Applicant’s credit record. 
 
Applicant is the best person to know his debts, and their status. Until his 
Response to the FORM in 2005, Applicant consistently admitted the debt and that he 
was not going to repay it.  Only on the Response does he start to claim, with no 
supporting documentation from VW Credit, Inc., that this first VW car debt was included 
in the 2001 bankruptcy.  The burden is on Applicant to show the facts are true when he 
states them.  While he could have merely denied the allegation in the SOR, he added 
language which is now shown to be untrue.  Applicant has not supplied any objective 
evidence that the various credit reports are erroneous when they list the debt as owing 
in 2006 and earlier.  Nor has he met his burden of proof to show VW Credit, Inc. was 
notified that the debt was included in the debts to be discharged.  He makes statements 
with no supporting proof.   
 
 The Government also contends Applicant’s 2000 discharge from the Army, and 
the underlying reasons for it, is unfavorable information from his employer, which at that 
time was the U.S. Army.  Applicant denies these allegations, claiming family and 
personal issues caused his discharge.  But his disclosure in Question 19 on the SF 86 
contradicts his answer and states that the psychological counseling was not due to 
family or marital issues. It is clear from the evidence Applicant was discharged in 2000 
because of concerns about his judgment and reliability pertaining to the safeguarding of 
classified information.  
 
 I conclude the Government introduced sufficient evidence to support each of the 
three disqualifying conditions raised in this case.  Now, the Applicant has the burden to 
provide evidence of the mitigating conditions under Guideline E. 
 
 
10 
 
 
There are seven potentially mitigating conditions which could apply. Because the 
unfavorable information was not unsubstantiated and was pertinent to a determination 
of judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability, E2.A5.1.3.1 does not apply.  The falsification 
was not an isolated incident, was recent, and Applicant continues to contend in his 
subsequent Responses that his original SOR Response was accurate. Therefore, 
E2.A5.1.3.2 does not apply.  Applicant has not made “prompt good-faith efforts to 
correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts,” so E2.A5.1.3.3 does not 
apply.  The remaining four mitigating conditions, by their context and intent, do not apply 
to the facts and situation of this case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant was an adult and a 
veteran with experience in filing out Government forms when he completed the SF 86 
and answered the original SOR.  There is a pattern of deception in the Responses he 
submitted.  For example, he ignores the Guideline E issue in the latest Response, and 
instead focuses on the Guideline F issue, which was previously decided in his favor.  He 
requests at least 12 months to get his finances in order so his family will not be 
homeless, but never submits any evidence he has family dependents.  He admits in the 
SF 86 his counseling was not family or marital related, but now contends it was.  He 
refuses to pay the delinquent debt for his 1999 VW car, but claims it was discharged in 
his 2001 bankruptcy when it was not a scheduled debt for discharge.  His written 
statements are continuously false and misleading, designed to obfuscate and confuse, 
in his attempts to keep his security clearance. There is no rehabilitation or permanent 
behavioral change evident in his conduct.   
 
Applicant chose not to have a hearing on his case, which was his option to do.  
However, I was not able to observe his demeanor, listen to his testimony, and judge his 
credibility because he did not present himself at a hearing where that process could 
occur.  I could only evaluate the totality of the evidence as presented in writing in the 
FORM, and make a decision on that evidence alone. 
 
11 
 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Any doubt about a security 
clearance is to be resolved in favor of the national security and not the individual 
(E2.2.2).  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his personal conduct.  I conclude the “whole person” concept 
against Applicant based on the continued pattern of mendacity and inconsistencies 
between his various Responses to the original SOR and amended SOR, the SF 86 
answers, and the information he submitted in addition to these pieces of information. 
 
Remand Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
    
Remand Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
