 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 06-25339 
 SSN: ------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign preference and 
foreign influence.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2005, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86). On August 30, 
2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On December 29, 2005, the President promulgated revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information, and on 
August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive 
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the SOR was issued 
on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG apply to Applicant’s case because her SOR 
was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on September 5, 2007. In a sworn, written 
statement, dated September 11, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on March 25, 2008, and the case was assigned 
to me the following day. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 31, 2008, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on May 7, 2008. 
 
During the hearing, three Government exhibits were received without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on May 15, 2008. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
Administrative Notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to both the Ukraine and the 
Russian Federation (hereinafter Russia), appearing in two written submissions.  Facts 
are proper for Administrative Notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized 
source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on 
source information regarding the Ukraine in publications of the Department of State;1 a 
press release from the U.S. Department of State, U.S. Embassy in Ukraine;2 and the 
Congressional Research Service.3  
 
1 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Background Note: Ukraine, dated 
March 2008; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices – 2007: Ukraine, dated March 11, 2008; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 
Country Specific Information: Ukraine, dated February 15, 2008; and U.S. Department of State, Office of the 
Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2006: Europe and Eurasia Overview, dated April 30, 
2007. 
 
2 U.S. Department of State, U.S. Embassy in Ukraine, Press Release: U.S. Ambassador’s Statement on 
Ukrainian Parliamentary Elections, dated October 1, 2007. 
 
3 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Ukraine: Current Issues and U.S. Policy, dated 
August 23, 2006. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
The Government relied on source information regarding Russia in publications of 
the Department of State;4 the Congressional Research Service;5 the National 
Counterintelligence Center (now known as the Office of the National Counterintelligence 
Executive);6 the Center for Counterintelligence and Security Studies;7 and the Defense 
Intelligence Agency.8 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts, as set forth 
below under the Ukraine and Russia subsections. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.c., and 2.a. through 2.d., of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and she is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been specified.  She has been 
employed as an optical engineer by the same government contractor since March 
2005.9  
 
Applicant was born in 195010 to ethnic Russian parents residing in the Ukraine.11 
After graduating from high school in 1967, she moved to Russia and entered a Russian 
university, eventually earning a Ph.D. in Physics in 1973.12 In 1978, she received a 
Ph.D. in Non-Linear Optics from another Russian institute.13 From 1978 until 1994, she 
was employed, first as an engineer with an institute, and then as a research scientist at 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Background Note: Russia, dated 
September 2007; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices – 2007: Russia, dated March 11, 2008; and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular 
Affairs, Country Specific Information: Russia, dated December 26, 2007. 
 
5 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Russian Political, Economic, and Security Issues 
and U.S. Interests, dated May 31, 2007. 
 
6 National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, 2005, dated August 2006. 
 
7 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Center for Counterintelligence and Security Studies, Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, excerpts, dated October 6, 2006. 
 
8 Defense Intelligence Agency, Director’s Statement for the Record, Senate Armed Services Committee, 
Current and Projected National Security Threats to the United States, dated February 27, 2007. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Aug. 25, 2005), at 11. 
 
10 Id. at 6.  
 
11 Tr. at 49. 
 
12 Id. at 33; Government Exhibit 2 (Statement of Subject, dated Apr. 26, 2007), at 1. 
 
13 Id. at 2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
a university laboratory.14 The combination of perestroika and the eventual breakup of 
the Soviet Union diminished funding for research in all the scientific fields, and made it 
more difficult to make a living in those fields.15 Accordingly, when her second husband, 
a research scientist, received an offer of employment from a U.S. university, he 
accepted it, and they emigrated from Russia to the U.S. in August 1994.16 She 
subsequently earned a Masters Degree in Computer Science from a U.S. university.17 
 
In 1972, while still a student at the Russian university, Applicant married her first 
husband, another student. They separated in 1977, and were divorced in 1982.18 She 
has had no contact with him in over 20 years.19 That same year, she and her current 
husband were married.20 She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000.21  
 
Applicant’s father, an engineer, was an ethnic Russian born in the Ukraine in 
1922. He passed away in 1982.22 
 
Her mother, a former university chemistry teacher (now retired) in the Ukraine 
and also an ethnic Russian, was born in Russia in 1924.23 In 2002, on behalf of her 
mother, Applicant submitted an application to the U.S. for an immigration visa, but the 
process was lengthened because of lost paperwork.  The process was finally completed 
and the visa was approved, and Applicant’s mother is expected to relocate to the U.S. 
within a year, after she completes a scheduled surgery.24 Applicant speaks with her 
mother once or twice each week by telephone,25 and augments her very small pension 
by sending her approximately $2,000-$3,000 per year.26 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. at 1-2. 
 
19 Tr. at 50. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
21 Id.  
 
22 Id. at 1. 
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Tr. at 32, 43, 49-50. 
 
25 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 4. 
 
26 Tr. at 59-60. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant’s husband, a world-renowned prize-winning scientist,27 was born in 
Russia in 1944.28 As noted above, they were married in 1982, immigrated to the United 
States in 1994, and he, too, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000. He has one 
son (born in 1975) from a prior marriage and they have two children together (born in 
1981 and 1985, respectively), all of whom reside in the United States.29 He also has a 
grandson residing in the U.S.30 He has never been affiliated with the Russian 
government, military, or intelligence services.31 There are no SOR allegations pertaining 
to Applicant’s husband. 
 
Applicant’s husband has two sisters, Applicant’s sisters-in-law, both of whom 
were born (in 1938 and 1939, respectively) and raised in Russia.32 They are Russian 
citizens and residents.33 They are both either semi-retired or retired research scientists 
with Russian institutes,34 and have never been affiliated with the Russian government, 
military, or intelligence services.35 Her older sister-in-law has visited the United States 
for both scientific conferences and personal reasons since her only son and his wife and 
their children reside here.36 Her younger sister-in-law has also visited the United States 
because she, too, has children and grandchildren residing here.37 Applicant speaks with 
her sisters-in-law, primarily about family matters, several times each year, particularly 
during the holidays or on birthdays.38  
 
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000, Applicant maintained her 
Russian passport.39 It was renewed in about 1998, before her naturalization, and again 
in 2003.40 She was issued her U.S. passport in August 2000.41 She traveled to Russia 
27 Id. at 37-38. 
 
28 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 17. 
 
29 Id. at 22-26. 
 
30 Tr. at 48. 
 
31 Id. at 51. 
 
32 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 4. 
 
33 Answer to SOR, dated Sep. 11, 2007, at 2. 
 
34 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 4; Tr. at 41, 50. 
 
35 Tr. at 50-51. 
 
36 Id. at 42-43, 51, 60. 
 
37 Id. at 51, 60. 
 
38 Id. at 52-53. 
 
39 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7. 
 
40 Id. 
 
41 Answer to SOR, supra note 33, at 2. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
with her daughter for visits in 1998 and 2000, stayed with her younger sister-in-law on 
both occasions,42 and used her Russian passport for both trips.43 In addition to her two 
trips to Russia, Applicant also traveled to the Ukraine in 2005 and 2006 to visit her 
mother,44 and used her Russian passport for those trips as well.45  
 
Applicant maintained and used her Russian passport solely for convenience and 
cost-savings while traveling to Russia and the Ukraine, and had no intention of 
reflecting a preference for Russia over the U.S.46 Applicant’s “closest family,” her 
husband and children, live in the U.S. and that is her “strongest bond.”47 In late April 
2007, Applicant advised an investigator that she would not wait for the Russian passport 
to expire, but would take immediate steps to relinquish it.48 She did so on May 2, 2007, 
when she surrendered it to her employer’s security department and it was destroyed by 
burning.49  
 
When Applicant and her husband became naturalized U.S. citizens, they both 
took an oath of allegiance to the United States.  That oath included the words:50 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen. 
. . .  
 
Neither of them has formally relinquished Russian citizenship under Russian law as it is 
a long and costly process.  However, they are both willing to commence the process, if 
necessary.51 
 
Neither Applicant nor her husband maintains any financial interests in Russia, as 
they sold everything in 1998.52  
42 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 3. 
 
43 Answer to SOR, supra note 33, at 1. 
 
44 Id. 
 
45 Id. at 2 
 
46 Id. at letter of explanation; Tr. at 30. 
 
47 Tr. at 32. 
 
48 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7. 
 
49 Government Exhibit 3 (Letter from Employer’s Security Administrator and Security Manager, dated May 2, 
2007). 
 
50 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
51 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7; Tr. at 77. 
 
52 Id. at 61. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Ukraine 
 
Ukraine has a parliamentary-presidential type of government since becoming 
independent of the Soviet Union in 1991. It is undergoing profound political and 
economic changes as it moves toward a market economy and multi-party democracy. 
The first “free” elections were marred by government intimidation and electoral fraud. 
The 2004 presidential election was condemned by the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as flawed by pervasive electoral fraud, and the United 
States and Europe refused to accept the results. The then-opposition candidate, Viktor 
Yuschenko, was even poisoned with dioxin. Massive demonstrations helped to overturn 
the former regime’s electoral fraud, in what has been referred to as the “Orange 
Revolution,” so named after Viktor Yuschenko’s campaign color. Ukraine’s Supreme 
Rada—450-member unicameral parliament—passed a vote of “no confidence” in the 
government, and the Ukraine Supreme Court invalidated the election results. A re-vote 
was conducted and, in January 2005, Yushchenko became Ukraine’s new President. 
Subsequent parliamentary and local elections in 2006 and 2007 were in line with 
international standards.  
 
Having inherited a military force of 780,000 from the Soviet Union, Ukraine is 
seeking to modernize with an eye toward achieving NATO, rather than the old Soviet, 
standards. Ukraine has been an active participant in six United Nation peacekeeping 
missions and has a small number of troops serving in supporting roles with Coalition 
forces in Iraq. Ukraine’s foreign policy goals, supported by the pro-west President, 
include membership in the World Trade Organization, the European Union, and the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Ukraine has peaceful and constructive relations with 
all its neighbors. Relations with Russia are complicated by differing foreign policy 
priorities in the region, energy dependence, payment arrears, disagreement over 
stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, and some boundary disputes. 
Ukraine has consistently supported peaceful, negotiated settlements to disputes. 
 
President Bush visited Ukraine on April 1, 2008, and praised Ukraine’s 
democratic and military reforms.  He noted:53 
 
Ukraine is contributing to every mission of the NATO Alliance, and 
honoring the ideals that unite the transatlantic community.  This week, 
Ukraine seeks to strengthen its transatlantic ties through a NATO 
Membership Action Plan.  The United States strongly supports your 
request. . . . [O]ur two nations share a common vision for the future.  We 
seek to advance a cause of freedom, and help all peoples of Europe live 
together in security and peace. 
 
53 White House Office of the Press Secretary, Press Release: President Bush and President Yushchenko of 
Ukraine Exchange Luncheon Toasts, Apr. 1, 2008, at www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2008/04/print/20080401-
4.html.  While this information was not included in Department Counsel’s request, I take Administrative Notice of 
these facts on my own initiative. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
Domestically, although there remain some serious human rights concerns, with 
continuing investigations to root out and solve the problems, Ukraine is largely free of 
significant civil unrest or any organized anti-American domestic political movements. 
Additionally, freedom of speech and press are guaranteed by law and by the 
constitution, and authorities generally respect these rights. 
 
There is no evidence that Ukraine is an active participant in economic espionage, 
industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Russia 
 
Russia is composed of 21 republics. The Government consists of a strong 
president, a prime minister, a bicameral legislature, and a weak judiciary often subject 
to political manipulation. It is a vast and diverse country with a population of 142 million 
people. It achieved independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 
1991, and remains a nuclear superpower that continues to develop politically, socially, 
and economically. On paper, Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international 
human rights standards, but it continues to be a “police state” where human rights 
abuses are rampant. There are numerous reports of human rights abuses, including law 
enforcement personnel engaged in torture, abuse, and violence to coerce confessions 
from suspects, with little accountability, despite the fact that the law prohibits such 
practices; widespread corruption within the police force; arbitrary arrest and detention; 
politically motivated arrests; abductions; and life threatening prison conditions. The 
media is largely state-controlled. There are restrictions on freedom of movement within 
the country, and all adults must carry government-issued internal passports while 
traveling internally, and they are required to register with the local authorities within a 
specified time of their arrival at a new location. 
 
Russia’s two main intelligence services are the Russian Foreign Intelligence 
Service (SVR) and the main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff (GRU), both 
overseen by the Russian National Security Council and coordinated through the 
Permanent Interbranch Commissions of the National Security. Its intelligence capability 
is significant and focuses on collection of information from the United States. The Soviet 
Union engaged in a series of high profile espionage missions against the United States, 
and Russia has continued the tradition. As of 2005, Russia was one of the two most 
aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounted for the 
majority of such targeting. Russia also provides technologies which could be used in the 
construction of weapons of mass destruction and missiles to other countries. It is a 
leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related 
technology to China, India, Iran, and Venezuela.  Nevertheless, the United States and 
Russia share common interests on a broad range of issues, including counterterrorism 
and the drastic reduction of our strategic arsenals.54 
 
54 It is interesting to note that because of closer diplomatic relations between the United States and Russia, 
at some unspecified time prior to 1999, the U.S. State Department started issuing Russian diplomats “no escort 
required” badges to wear during visits to the State Department building. 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
Russia has attempted to reassert its dominance in, and integration of, the former 
Soviet states and has generally been successful with Belarus and Armenia. It has 
remained unwelcomingly active in the internal affairs of several of its neighboring 
countries—former republics of the Soviet Union or occupied “independent countries”—
such as Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova, and has issued threats against 
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Estonia. 
 
U.S. citizens who have, at one time, held Russian citizenship, may be required to 
renounce Russian citizenship before applying for a Russian visa in their U.S. passport.  
Unless a Russian citizen has formally renounced his or her Russian citizenship, he or 
she risks being considered a Russian citizen and not allowed to depart except on a 
Russian passport. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”55 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
55 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
10 
                                      
 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member” is 
potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 10(a)(1), this includes but is not limited to:  
“possession of a current foreign passport.”  Similarly, under AG ¶ 10(d) “any statement 
or action that shows allegiance to a country other than the United States: for example, 
declaration of intent to renounce United States citizenship; renunciation of United States 
citizenship” may raise security concerns. 
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000, Applicant retained the 
Russian passport that had been previously issued to her, and used it to travel to Russia 
in 2000, despite already having been issued her U.S. passport. And, in 2003, she 
renewed the Russian passport, and eventually used it for her trips to the Ukraine in 
2005 and 2006. By her actions, she exercised the rights and privilege of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. I find AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(d) apply. 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the “dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country.”  Similarly, AG ¶ 11(b), may apply where “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.”  Also, AG ¶ 11(e) may apply 
where “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
 Applicant explained that her only motivation for using her Russian passport in 
2000, 2005, and 2006, was not an indication of a preference for Russia over the United 
States, but rather solely for her convenience and cost-savings while traveling to Russia 
and the Ukraine, and it was not her intention to reflect a preference for Russia over the 
U.S.  Furthermore, until 2007, she was unaware of the potential security significance of 
retaining or using her Russian passport. 
 
 Thus, the issue, distilled to its basic components, is: whether Applicant's actions 
in failing to formally renounce her Russian citizenship under Russian law, and her 
renewing, possessing, and using her Russian passport, were merely for personal 
convenience and cost-savings, or indicative of a preference for Russia over the United 
States. Considering Applicant’s explanations, and her subsequent action in 
surrendering and destroying her Russian passport, and her stated willingness to 
renounce her Russian citizenship, I find ¶¶ 11(a), 11(b), and 11(e) apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.56 Applicant’s relationship with her mother in the 
56 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
Ukraine and her two sisters-in-law in Russia, and her travels to both countries, are 
current concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case.  
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with her family members who are 
either Russian or Ukrainian citizen-residents to determine the degree of “heightened 
risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows Athere is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.@ In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  In this instance, 
her relationship with those family members is neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, including the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.57  In fact, the Appeal Board has 
57 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
 
13 
                                      
 
                                                          
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”58 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States through the Applicant.  It is reasonable to presume that although a 
friendly relationship, or the existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, 
it may make it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. 
citizen through relatives or associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the United States and 
Ukraine have developed an increasingly warm and friendly relationship making it 
unlikely that the Ukraine Government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive 
information.  However, it does not eliminate the possibility that Ukraine would employ 
some non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit a relative.  While Applicant’s 
mother still resides in Ukraine, at least until she is able to emigrate later this year, there 
may be speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, 
without more, establish sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance.  As to her mother in Ukraine, I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies in this case.  
 
Russia is a different matter because it continues to be a “police state” where 
human rights abuses are rampant, with little accountability.  As of 2005, Russia was one 
of the two most aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and 
accounted for the majority of such targeting.  Russia’s relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that 
Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. The complicated relationship of Russia to the United States places a 
significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that her sisters-in-law in Russia do not pose a security risk and she is not in a position 
to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and those extended-family 
members. With its occasionally adversarial stance and its mixed human rights record, it 
is conceivable that Russia could target any citizen in an attempt to gather information 
from the United States. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s sisters-in-law are, or have been, political 
activists, challenging the policies of the Russian Government. There is no evidence that 
terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or her sisters-in-law for any reason. 
There is no evidence the Russian Government has approached Applicant. There is no 
evidence that her sisters-in-law living in Russia currently engage in activities that would 
bring attention to themselves or that they are even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, 
58 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
14 
                                      
 
there is a reduced possibility that they would be targets for coercion or exploitation by 
the Russian Government, which may seek to quiet those who speak out against it.  
Moreover, the children and grandchildren of both sisters-in-law reside in the United 
States, removing one substantial potential source of Russian pressure on either sister-
in-law. The situation is mitigated because of the reduced possibility that Russia will 
exploit her sisters-in-law. She has met her burden of showing there is little likelihood 
that those relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. As to her 
sisters-in-law in Russia, I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies in this case.  
 
Applicant has been a resident of the United States since 1994. She and her 
husband became naturalized U.S. citizens, and their two children and his son and 
grandson all reside in the United States. She surrendered her Russian passport and 
she is willing to renounce her dual citizenship. They have no foreign financial interests 
in Russia or the Ukraine. He is fully involved in his children’s lives and activities. 
Applicant and her husband have “such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest.”  I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies in this case. 
 
It is true that, since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2000, Applicant took one trip to 
Russia and two trips to Ukraine to visit either her mother or her sisters-in-law.  At the 
time of her 1998 trip to Russia, she was still a Russian citizen, and that trip should have 
no current security interest.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and her “closest family”—
her husband, and their two children—have resided in the U.S. since 1994, and became 
naturalized U.S. citizens in 2000.  Her husband’s son and grandson also reside here. 
 
15 
                                      
 
Likewise, the families of her two sisters-in-law reside in the U.S., and her mother will 
soon join the family here. As such, they are not vulnerable to direct coercion or 
exploitation, and the realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
with regard to them is low. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Russia and Ukraine must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situations in those countries, as well as the dangers 
existing there. Russia is a diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States in some 
areas where both countries have mutual interests. Russia is a key partner in the search 
for peace in the Middle East and resolution of problems with Iraq and Iran. Russia, then 
a part of the Soviet Union, was an important ally in World War II, and then our greatest 
antagonist during the Cold War.  Russia has a mixed human rights record, and like the 
United States, has been subject to terrorist attacks. Russia is a known collector of U.S. 
economic intelligence and proprietary information, but the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress based upon Applicant’s remaining ties to Russia—her 
two sisters-in-law without any affiliation or relationship to the Government of Russia—
are insufficient to raise a security concern. 
 
Ukraine, on the other hand, is a rapidly developing multi-party democracy, 
contributing to NATO Alliance missions. Ukraine has aligned itself with the West and 
applied for NATO membership, an action supported by the U.S. because both nations 
share a common vision for the future. It is in Ukraine’s interests to maintain friendship 
with the U.S. to counterbalance Russia, and it is very unlikely Ukraine would forcefully 
attempt to coerce Applicant through her mother still residing in Ukraine. Furthermore, 
there is no evidence that Ukraine is an active participant in economic espionage, 
industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations. 
(See AG & 2(a)(8).) 
 
As to Applicant’s actions in renewing and using her Russian passport on three 
occasions after she became a naturalized U.S. citizen, they raise several different 
issues. When Applicant renewed her Russian passport, she had no intention of 
reflecting a preference for Russia over the United States. At that time, she was unaware 
of the security significance of her actions. When she did learn of the significance, 
Applicant took immediate steps to relinquish her Russian passport, and did so in May 
2007, when she surrendered it to her employer’s security department and it was 
destroyed by burning.  (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 2(a)(5), 2(a)(7), and 
2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence 
and foreign preference concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
16 
                                      
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
