 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-26748 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on December 5, 2005. On March 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 2, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to be proceed on April 9, 2008. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on May 19, 2008, and 
transferred to me on May 21, 2008. On June 5, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued, 
scheduling the hearing for July 15, 2008. The case was heard on that date. The 
Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 
– 4 without objection. The Applicant offered two exhibits which were admitted as 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – B without objection. Applicant testified. The record was held 
open until July 29, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted a ten page document that was admitted as AE C without objection. The 
transcript was received on July 23, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all factual allegations in the 
SOR.   
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He has held his current position since April 2007.  He is 
single and has no children. The highest level of education he has achieved is one year 
of junior college. (Tr at 5-6; Gov 1.)   
 
On December 5, 2005, Applicant filed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Gov 1.) A subsequent background investigation 
revealed that Applicant had seven delinquent accounts, with a total approximate 
balance of $22,991. (Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 4.)   
 
Applicant’s delinquent accounts include: an $663 medical account placed for 
collection in June 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 6); a $2,114 
delinquent account placed for collection in June 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 8; Gov 3 at 
1); a $523 delinquent medical account placed for collection in December 2004 (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 6); a $238 delinquent utility account placed for collection in 
May 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 6); a $14,046 delinquent credit card account 
placed for collection in July 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 8; Gov 4 at 3); a $255 delinquent 
account placed for collection in May 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 6; Gov 4 at 6); and a 
$5,152 delinquent account placed for collection in June 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 8; 
Gov 4 at 4-5). 
 
Much of the debt was incurred when Applicant and his live-in girlfriend broke up 
in late 2002. When they split up, each agreed to be responsible for certain debts. 
Applicant’s ex-girlfriend did not pay the debts that she agreed to pay. Applicant refused 
to pay her debt even though the accounts were in his name. He realizes that he made a 
poor choice and is now attempting the resolve the delinquent accounts. (Tr at 18, 20-21, 
36.) He admits that the medical accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.f) are his sole debts. 
(Tr at 43.)   
 
On October 7, 2007, Applicant enrolled in a 40-month debt repayment program 
with a debt consolidation company. He agreed to pay $465 month to the debt 
consolidation company. The debt consolidation company also advised Applicant on his 
finances. The payments are deducted automatically from his checking account. He has 
not missed a payment. (Tr at 17, 19, 22, 29, 44; AE A at 1: AE C at 2-8.) 
 
3 
 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c have been resolved. (AE A at 5-8.) All 
of the Applicant’s remaining delinquent accounts are included in his repayment plan. 
The debt consolidation company negotiated the balance owed with the creditor who 
holds the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The balance owed is now $8,572 as opposed to 
$14,046. (Tr at 25-27; AE A at 1; AE C at 10.)  
  
Applicant’s current net monthly income is $3,062. His total monthly expenses are 
$2,081. This includes his payment to the debt consolidation company. After expenses, 
Applicant has $981 left over in discretionary income. (AE C at 9.) He spends a lot of his 
spare time renovating his house and renovating his parents’ house. He has no open 
credit card accounts. (Tr at 32, 34, 45.) 
  
Several reference letters were submitted on Applicant’s behalf. They include 
letters from a criminal investigator in the local district attorney’s office, the Speaker of 
the House of Representatives in Applicant’s state; and the Sheriff of the county where 
Applicant resides. These letters attest to Applicant’s clean criminal record. (AE B at 1-2, 
4.) Applicant’s immediate supervisor who is also the Facility Security Officer of the 
company wrote a letter on his behalf. He states that Applicant is consistent in his work 
ethic. He describes Applicant as a take-charge person who is able to present creative 
ideas and communicate the benefits. He recommends Applicant for a security clearance 
noting that he is a team player whose character and ethics are above reproach. (AE B 
at 3.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) & 19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC & 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. Since 2002, Applicant has incurred 
approximately seven delinquent debts, an approximate total of $22,991. Most of his 
financial issues resulted from an unwillingness to pay the debts that he believed were 
his ex-girlfriend’s debts. He was capable of paying the debts. 
  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is partially applicable. 
Applicant initially refused to pay several debts because he thought they were his ex-
girlfriend’s responsibility. He now admits he used poor judgment by refusing to pay 
these debts and has taken steps to resolve the accounts. He has consistently made  
payments to a debt consolidation company over the past nine months. The debts are 
starting to be resolved.  However, five of the seven debts remain unresolved so this 
mitigating condition is given less weight.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Most of the debts became 
delinquent because Applicant refused to pay the debts that he thought were his ex-
girlfriend’s responsibility even though the accounts were in his name. Applicant was 
capable of paying these debts so FC MC ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. The debt consolidation company that Applicant entered into an 
agreement with also provided him with some financial counseling.  He now follows a 
budget. He has demonstrated that he is capable of paying the monthly payment to the 
debt consolidation company and pay his other bills. His financial situation is stable and it 
is likely Applicant will resolve his delinquent accounts based on his seven month history 
of timely payments to the debt consolidation company. Two of the accounts have been 
resolved.  He lives within his means. 
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts) applies. Although Applicant initially refused to pay these debts 
because he believed they were his ex-girlfriend’s debts, he eventually accepted his 
responsibility to repay the delinquent accounts and entered into a repayment agreement 
with a debt consolidation company. He has followed the terms of the agreement since 
November 2007. He has demonstrated that he is financially able to make his payments 
under the plan and pay his other expenses.  
 
Guideline F is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
 
6 
 
 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
references, and his efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts.  While Applicant has not 
resolved all of his delinquent accounts, he has demonstrated that he has taken efforts to 
resolve his delinquent accounts and is financially able to do so. Applicant accepts 
responsibility for his foolish decision not to pay these accounts out of anger at his ex-
girlfriend. Applicant has established a track record demonstrating his intent to resolve 
the issues raised under financial considerations. Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant    
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
