1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-05761
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: B. Daniel Lynch, Esquire
August 7, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November  7,
2006. On December 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
K and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on April 4, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
May 14, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 11, 2008, and I convened the
hearing on June 26, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and three other
witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. Through counsel, he submitted Exhibits A
through E, which were entered without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
2
hearing (Tr) on July 7, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant
and the additional witnesses, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the
following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 54 years old. He is married, and he has two children. He has
received two Bachelor of Science degrees and one Master’s Degree in electrical
engineering. 
Applicant works as an electrical engineer for a defense contractor, and he seeks
a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline K - Handling Protected Information) 
The SOR lists 4 allegations under Adjudicative Guideline K. All of the allegations
will be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. On or about March 3, 2006, Applicant received a first warning letter from his
employer after a security inspection revealed that Applicant had failed to secure a
classified container in an approved manner.
In the Final Report of Investigation (Exhibit 4), the investigator stated that
Applicant’s safe was not secured because the “lock bar [was] not in place.” An
examination of a sample of the material in the safe determined it to be DoD Secret. The
investigator indicated in his report that Applicant informed him that he had “worked late
and forgot to secure the cabinet.”  Compromise was considered extremely minimal.
However, it could not be ruled out, and therefore Applicant received the Security
Violation. 
During Applicant’s testimony, he conceded that he had inadvertently left open his
safe (tr at 72).
1.b. The security violation, summarized in subparagraph 1.a., above is a violation
of DoD 5520.22-M, the National Security Manual, dated February 28, 2006, and DoD
National Industria Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) Supplement, dated April 1,
2004.
1.c.  On or about November 29, 2006, Applicant received a second warning letter
from his employer after a security inspection revealed that Applicant had failed to
secure classified material and media, some of which had their specific classification
markings crossed out,  in an approved container.
3
In the second Final Report of Investigation, dated February 7, 2007, (Exhibit 4),
the investigator stated that Applicant “failed to store media and two binders marked as
Secret/SAR/SJS in a SJS approved container within an SJS approved area. [Applicant]
. . . also failed to conduct proper downgrading procedures and did not take into
consideration the media was originated on a SAR system. [Applicant] . . . instead
downgraded a disk by marking out the DJS/SAR with a black marker.”
The investigator indicated in his report that “because the same DoD security
container was inadvertently left unsecured on 3 March 2006, and the fact it could not be
determined when the binders were placed in the DoD container the potential for
compromise cannot be ruled out.”
Applicant testified that he had removed SAR or Special Access Required from
one of the disks he placed in his file because “I was told that the information [on the
disk] was not SAR, and at the time I didn’t understand the rules and regulations of the
markings, cause on hard copy documents, if we knew something’s not SAR, we can
cross that out.” (Tr at 75-76). 
1.d.  The security violation, summarized in subparagraph 1.c., above is a
violation of DoD 5520.22-M, the National Security Manual, dated February 28, 2006,
and DoD National Industria Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) Supplement, dated
April 1, 2004.
While it was not alleged in the SOR, it was revealed during the hearing that
Applicant has had two additional security violations. Applicant revealed that in
approximately 1990 he was cited and counseled for leaving his safe open (Tr at 85). 
Applicant’s supervisor from January 2004 through November 2007 also revealed
during his testimony that an additional warning letter was issued to Applicant in June
2005, although apparently it was no longer in the file, and therefore was not included in
the SOR (Tr at 30-32).  This warning was issued to Applicant and two or three other
individuals who shared a safe, because it was determined that special access material
was in a safe not authorized for these documents. Applicant was the primary custodian
of the safe at the time these documents were located to be incorrectly stored.   
Applicant’s supervisor also testified that there is a web based annual security
certification that all program access individuals must complete, and that covers such
areas as handling of special access materials and storing them in proper containers (Tr
at 34). Finally, this supervisor submitted a character letter recommending Applicant
retain his security clearance (Exhibit A).
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
2.a. The Government alleges that Applicant’s security violation, as alleged in
paragraph 1, above exhibits questionable judgement and unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations. 
4
Mitigation
Applicant testified that since his last warning he has better organized, cataloged
his safe and drastically reduced the number of document in it so he knows exactly what
documents are in the safe to limit the likelihood of having inappropriate documents in it
(Tr at 91). He also locks his safe now every time he removes a classified document
rather than waiting until he has finished with the document and replaced it (Tr at 92 -93).
Finally, two additional witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant, his daughter and
his wife. His daughter characterized her father as a very responsible person, who never
revealed anything inappropriate about his work to her. Applicant’s wife of 27 years
testified that her husband is honorable, truthful, and extremely reliable. Applicant also
offered into evidence three additional character letters from individuals who know or
have known him in his professional or private life (Exhibit D). They all were extremely
laudatory in describing  Applicant as careful, honest,  intelligent, and reliable.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline K - Handling Protected Information
With respect to Guideline K, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper handling of secured information, which resulted in three letters of
warning during the period from 2005 through 2007, is of great concern to the
Government. His storing material improperly in his safe, leaving his safe unsecured and
changing the classification on a secured disk comes within the Disqualifying Conditions
(DC) 34. (b) (collecting or storing classified or other protected information in an
unauthorized location), (g) (failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or
other sensitive information) and (h) (negligence or lax security habits that persist despite
counseling by management).
In reviewing the Mitigating Conditions (MC) under 35., I find that Applicant’s three
violations, that occurred within the last three years, are too recent and too frequent to
conclude that such conduct will not recur again. Based on Applicant’s former
supervisor’s testimony about the training that employees receive, I can not conclude
that Applicant received improper or inadequate training. While MC (b) (the individual
now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities)
can be argued to be applicable, I do not find it controlling because it is too recent from
the time of the violations to establish the security significance of this mitigating factor.  
In this case, the Government has met its burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has negligently failed to comply with rules and regulations for
protecting classified information, which raises doubt about his trustworthiness,
judgement, reliability and willingness and ability to safeguard such information. I find
that these events happened too recently and too frequently for Applicant to overcome
the Government's case against him at this time.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1 Guideline K
of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
6
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant’s conduct
comes under DC (d) (3) because his pattern of rules violations supports a whole-person
assessment of untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations 
 I resolve Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines K and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including the recency and frequency of rules
violations, I find that the record evidence leaves me with sufficient questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude that at this time, Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
