 
 
 
1
     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08303 
                                                            )                          
                                                            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.   His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on June 7, 2005. 
On April 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
 
 
 
2
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 23, 2008 and June 20, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and 
requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.  The 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 26, 2008. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9.  By letter dated June 26, 
2008, a copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received 
the file on July 7, 2008.  His response was due on August 6, 2008. He submitted one 
additional document within the required time period.  Department Counsel did not object 
to Applicant’s submission. On August 15, 2008, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision. After reviewing Applicant’s submission, I marked it as Applicant’s exhibit (Ex.) 
A and admitted it to the record in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He and his wife have been married since 1987, and 
they are the parents of two adult children.  From 1984 to 2004, Applicant served on 
active military duty.  Since 2004, he has been employed as a federal contractor. He has 
been employed by his present employer since 2005. He has held a security clearance 
since 1994.  (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s yearly salary from his job as a federal contractor is approximately 
$53,000.  His bi-weekly net pay is approximately $1,840.  He receives about $1,300 
each month in military retirement pay. He has about $12,000 in savings in a 401-K 
account.  (Item 7 at 3, 5.)  
 
 The SOR contains 15 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.o.) and two allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.) The 15 delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR total $41,238. All 15 allegations of financial delinquency were identified and 
listed on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of November 1, 2005 and April 15, 2008. In 
his Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2008 and June 20, 2008, Applicant admitted 11 
of the Guideline F allegations (¶¶ 1.b. through 1.e. and ¶¶ 1.i. through 1.o.) The alleged 
debts admitted by Applicant total $38,827.  He denied four debts, totaling $2,411 (¶¶ 
1.a., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h.) He admitted both Guideline E allegations. Applicant’s 
admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 4; Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in July 2006.  In the interview, he told the investigator 
that in about 1997 he began to spend more than he earned and became financially 
overextended and overwhelmed with debt. He also reported that two vehicles he owned 
were voluntarily repossessed one in June or July 2004 and the second in late 2004 or 
early 2005.  He had not contacted the creditors since the repossessions, and so he did 
 
 
 
3
not know how much he owed on each vehicle.  He was questioned about other 
delinquent debts but had very little specific information about what he owed and to 
whom.  He told the investigator he planned to begin paying his past debts in January 
2007.   (Item 6.) 
 
 In response to a financial interrogatory from DOHA, Applicant provided a 
document from a creditor stating he had satisfied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d.  He 
also provided an undated payment schedule indicating he was disputing the debts 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.l.  However, he provided no documentation to corroborate 
his dispute of those debts.  Additionally, he provided a settlement offer from a creditor 
who had repossessed his automobile. He did not indicate whether he had responded to 
the settlement offer.  (Item 7 at 6, 8, 9; Item 9 at 6.) 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter stating he was participating 
in a credit assistance program in which he was receiving advice on addressing the 
debts alleged on the SOR.  He expressed an intent to remain in the program until all of 
his debts had been settled. Nothing in the record suggests that Applicant has 
participated in consumer credit counseling.  (Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant completed and certified his SF-86 on June 7, 2005.  Question 35 on 
the SF-86 reads: “Your Financial Record – Repossessions In the last 7 years, have 
you had any property repossessed for any reason?” Applicant responded “no” to 
Question 35.  Question 38 on the SF-86 reads: “Your Financial Delinquencies – 180 
Days  In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
Applicant responded “no” to Question 38.   
 
 When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator and asked why he 
denied any property repossessions and delinquent debts on his SF-86, Applicant did not 
provide a response.  (Item 6 at 10.)  
  
                                         Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
 
 
 
 
4
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
 
5
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant provided credible documentation to corroborate his 
assertion that one of his debts had been satisfied. In his response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant provided documentation to corroborate that he had satisfied a 
debt for $620, alleged at ¶ 1.d, that had been charged off as a bad debt. The SOR 
allegation at ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant. 
 
The Government alleged Applicant owed the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 
1.g, and 1.h. The basis for the Government’s allegations was Applicant’s credit report of 
April 15, 2008. Applicant denied owing those debts. In the face of Applicant’s denial, the 
credit report is insufficient evidence to prove he owes the four debts.  Accordingly, the 
allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h are also concluded for Applicant. 
 
However, Applicant’s additional financial delinquencies demonstrate he 
accumulated substantial debt and was unwilling or unable to satisfy his creditors over a 
considerable period of time. This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and 19(c).  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F 
mitigating conditions could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies. Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. (AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be 
mitigated if the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances 
that might be applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control (AG ¶ 20(c) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20(d)) Finally, an applicant 
can offer in mitigation documentary evidence to establish that he or she has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of a past due debt and has taken action to 
resolve the issue. (AG ¶ 20(e).)   
 
Applicant admitted that his financial problems began in 1997, when he spent 
more than he earned and consequently found himself enveloped in debt. His financial 
problems continued, and in 2004, two of his vehicles were voluntarily repossessed.  
 
 
 
 
6
One of those repossessions was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. During the time of his financial 
problems, Applicant had steady employment in the U.S. military and as a government 
contractor. He offered no explanation for the significant debt which continues to the 
present day, a situation that raises concerns about his judgment and reliability.   
 
Applicant has not contacted the majority of his creditors to arrange payment 
plans or to initiate settlement. In 2006 he told an authorized investigator that he would 
pay his financial delinquencies in January 2007. He has not done so. Recently, he 
sought professional help in identifying his debts and paying his creditors. Again, he 
stated an intent to satisfy his financial delinquencies in the future. I conclude that that 
none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
In June 2005, when Appellant answered “no” to Questions 35 and 38 on his SF-
86, he had  experienced two voluntary vehicle repossessions in 2004 and had a number 
of long-standing financial delinquencies. In his interview with an authorized investigator, 
he admitted that, since about 1997, he had been spending more than he earned.  In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted falsifying material facts in his answers to 
Questions 35 and 38. This information raises a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), 
which reads as follows: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
I have carefully reviewed all the applicable Guideline E mitigating conditions, and 
I have especially reviewed AG ¶ 17(a), which reads as follows: “the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts.”  The investigative record shows that Applicant falsified 
his answers to Questions 35 and 38 on the SF-86 he signed and certified on June 7, 
2005.  He did not make a prompt good-faith attempt to correct the falsifications.  The 
falsifications were brought to his attention in his security interview in July 2006, more 
than a year after he had signed and certified his SF-86.  When confronted with the facts, 
Applicant offered no explanation for his falsifications. I conclude that AG ¶ 17 (a) does 
 
 
 
7
not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  I also conclude that no other Guideline E 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Appellant is a mature person. He 
has held a security clearance since 1994, and knows the importance of telling the truth 
to the government. He accumulated over $41,000 in delinquent debt and failed to 
arrange payment or satisfaction of the majority of those debts over a period of years.  
He offered no information that his financial delinquencies, especially over the last four 
years, resulted from circumstances beyond his control.  Applicant’s unwillingness to 
address his financial delinquencies suggests that they will continue. His financial over 
extension will likely recur. 
 
Additionally, Applicant admitted that he falsified material facts in his responses to 
Questions 35 and 38 on his SF-86. He deliberately concealed facts about his 
automobile repossessions and his long-standing financial delinquencies.  His failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers raises serious concerns about his reliability and 
trustworthiness.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies and personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:                      For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.e:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h: For Applicant 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.i through 1.o: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
