                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06997
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 22, 2008, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on June 14, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on July 15,
2008.  A hearing was held on July 15, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether it
would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of six
exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and three exhibits.  The transcript
2
(R.T.) was received on July 23, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is denied.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of 12
documents:  Background Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State (March 2008); Country
Specific Information, Iran, U.S. Department of State (June 2007) U.S. Department of
State (August 2007); Travel Warning, Iran, U.S. Department of State (January 2008);
CRS Response for Congress, Iran: U.S. Concerns and Policy Responses, U.S.
Department of State (January 2008);  Country Reports on Human Rights Practices -
2007, Iran, U.S. Department of State  (March 2008); Country Reports on Terrorism 2007,
Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, U.S. Department of State (November
2007); Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism
Overview, U.S. Department of State (April 2008); The National Security Strategy of the
United States of America, President of the United States (March 2006); The Iranian
Regime: A Challenge to the World, U.S. Department of State (May 2006); Making
America Safer by Defeating Extremists in the Middle East, Statement by President of the
United States  (August 2007); President Bush Delivers State of the Union Address
(January 2008); President Bush’s Message to the Congress of the United States (March
2008);  Annual Threat Assessment for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
(February 2008). 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 2007); ISCR
Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 2006).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.   See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Iran.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evi.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Iran’s current state.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to (a) have immediate family members
(his spouse, mother, brother and three sisters who are citizens and residents of Iran, (b)
have a father-in-law and mother-in-law who are citizens and residents of Iran, (c) have
traveled to Iran in 2001, and (d) traveled to the UAE in 2004 to visit family.  For his
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with
explanations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old service systems engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
3
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Iran and attended private schools there.  He
immigrated to the U.S. in 1978 at the age of 18 on a student visa to attend an accredited
university and pursue and engineering curriculum (R.T., at 35-36, 39-40).  
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1996 (see ex. 1), and
renewed his Iranian passport in February 1996 (see ex. 5).  When he became a U.S.
citizen, and obtained his U.S. passport, he retained his Iranian passport for a number of
years and used it on one occasion when he traveled to Iran (R.T., at 42, 79). He only
recently (in March 2008) surrendered his Iranian passport to his employer (see ex. 4;
R.T., at 36-37), and still does not know how the Iranian government treats his dual
citizen status (R.T., at 42).   While he could conceivably obtain an Iranian passport in the
future, he has no intention of doing so (R.T., at 42-43).  Still, he has never made any
attempt to renounce his Iranian citizenship.  He has never served in the Iranian military,
has no willingness to do so now, and immigrated to the U.S. to avoid military service in
Iran’s military forces (R.T., at 43).   Applicant has had nothing to do with the Iranian
government since immigrating to this country and has never worked for the Iranian
government in any capacity (R.T., at 44-45).
Applicant met his wife (W) while attending college in the U.S. Like, Applicant, she
was born and raised in Iran and immigrated to the U.S. after high school to attend
college.(R.T., at 49).  She joined Applicant in becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in
September 1996 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 47).  Applicant and his spouse were married in June
1979.  They have two children: a daughter (age 25) who attends law school and a son
(age 17) who will be senior in high school (see ex. 1; R.T., at 51-52).  
Applicant’s father, an Iranian citizen by birth, is deceased (ex. 1). During his
lifetime, he neither served in the Iranian military or worked in the Iranian government
(R.T., at 46-47, 53).  His mother is a citizen and resident of Iran (see exs. 1 and 2; R.T.,
at 53-54).  She is 79 years of age and has never worked for the Iranian government (see
ex. 2; R.T., at 54).  She has no pension or health insurance from the Iranian government.
She is self sufficient through his father’s savings insurance and receives no financial
support from Applicant (R.T., at 54, 57).  Applicant talks with his mother by telephone
every  couple of months (R.T., at 56).  
Both Applicant’s brother and three sisters are citizens and residents of Iran.  His
brother (two years younger than Applicant) works for a major university in Iran, which
may or may not be affiliated with the Iranian government (R.T., at 59-60).  His brother
has worked for this university for most of his adult life.  He served for two years in the
Iranian military, which is mandatory for all male Iranian citizens (R.T., at 61).  Applicant
does not know whether his brother has a military pension or not (R.T., at 62).  And to the
best of his knowledge, his brother has had no other affiliations with the Iranian
government (R.T., at 63). He makes telephone contact with his brother every six months
(R.T., at 63).  His brother has two children who reside in Iran and attend college there
(R.T.,at 64).
4
Besides his brother, Applicant has three sisters who are citizens and residents of
Iran.  The oldest previously worked for a bank and has not been in the work force for
over 20 years (R.T., at 65).  Her husband owns a private appliance store (R.T., at 66).
Applicant’s next oldest sister was a school teacher at a private school before she retired
several years ago (R.T., at 66).  She has a private pension from the same school.  Her
husband is an agricultural engineer, and they have two children; one resides abroad,
while the youngest lives at home and attends an Iranian college (R.T., at 67).
Applicant’s youngest sister is also a retired school teacher (R.T., at 69).  Her husband
continues to teach school.  They have three children: the oldest is an engineer for a
private firm, and the youngest attends college (R.T., at 69-70).  Applicant talks with his
and sisters monthly by telephone (see ex. 2).
Most of W’s family members are also citizens and residents of Iran (R.T., at 71-
74).  They visit the U.S. every five to six years to see Applicant and W, and typically
spend two to three months with Applicant and his family. W’s father owns a private
business in Iran, and has neither served in the Iranian military nor worked for the Iranian
government (R.T., at 72).  Her mother is a housewife and has had no involvement with
the Iranian government (R.T., at 72).  W’s brothers (two in all) and sisters (three in
number) are Iranian citizens by birth and reside in Iran.  Each of his sisters is a
housewife, and has no involvement in the Iranian government.  One brother sells
appliances and has no involvement with the Iranian government (R.T., at 73).  The other
brother currently resides in India while attending college (R.T., at 73-74).  Applicant has
no relatives affiliated with the Iranian military or government that he is aware of.  
Applicant has no assets in Iran, no expectation of any inheritance from his family,
and no known obligations to any Iranian citizens/residents (ex. 2; R.T., at 75).  W’s family
members own apartment units in Iran, but W has no interest in any of these units.
Applicant’s home in the U.S. has been appraised at $365,000.00.   When he last traveled
to Iran in 2001 to visit his family, he used his Iranian passport, but always showed his
U.S. passport as well (R.T., at 77-80).  Iranian officials wanted to know here he was
going (R.T., at 77-79). Frustrated with the Iranian government’s internal and foreign
policies, he has no plans to return to the country (R.T., at 38).  In 2004, he picked the
UAE as a venue to see his mother and sister, and used his U.S. passport to enter and
exit the country (R.T., at 80-81).  While he strongly opposes the current Iranian regime,
he has no reason to believe that any of his family members are at any risk to pressure,
duress or coercion from Iranian military and intelligence officials (see ex. 2; R.T., at 81-
82).   He provides no details, though, as to why he believes his family is not at risk.
Political and economic background of Iran
According to official U.S. State Department documents, Iran is an Islamic republic
that is constitutionally constructed and has a head of state, an elected president and
counsel of ministers, a legislative body composed of a 290-member Islamic consultative
assembly, and a judiciary (see U.S. Dept. of State Background Note on Iran, supra, at 5).
Throughout its long history, Iran has been ruled by numerous dynasties.  Following a
nationalist uprising against the Shah in 1905, Iran enacted a limited constitution in 1906.
5
Two years later, oil was discovered, and Iran began its steady ascension  to a modern,
secularized political system.  Under the reign of Reza Shah Pahlavi (an Iranian officer,
who seized control of the government in 1921), Iran enacted policies of modernization
and secularization, established a central government and reasserted its authority over
the tribes and provinces (see U.S. Dept. of State Background Note on Iran, id., at 3).
During the Allied occupation of western Iran in 1941, the Shah was forced to abdicate
and was succeeded by his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (see U.S. Dept. of State
Background Note on Iran, id.).
Domestic turmoil swept Iran in 1978 as the result of heated religious and political
opposition to the Shah’s rule and political/economic programs (especially the Shah’s
internal security and intelligence service).  And in February 1979, exiled religious leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from France to direct a revolution resulting in a
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.  Iran’s 1979 constitution allocates
the duties of the chosen religious leaders and governing bodies in such a way that their
duties often overlap.  Legislative issues on which the Majles (Iran’s legislative governing
body) and the Council of Guardians (making up Iran’s religious leadership) fail to agree
are resolved by the Council of Expediency (a body created by Ayatollah Khomeini in
1988).  Following the Ayatollah’s death in June 1989, the Assembly of Experts (an
elected body of senior clerics) chose the outgoing president of the republic (Ali
Khamenei) to be the Ayatollah’s successor as national religious leader (see U.S. Dept. of
State Background Note on Iran, id., at 4).
Iran’s post-revolution has been marked by an eight-year war with Iran, internal
political struggles and unrest, and economic disorder.  Its post-revolution regime has
been associated with human rights violations and political turmoil, including the seizure
of the U.S. Embassy in November 1979 by Iranian militants and the hostage taking of 52
Americans (see CRS Response for Congress, Iran: U.S. Concerns and Policy
Responses, U.S. Department of State (January 2008, supra, at 2).  Succeeding power
struggles have severely eroded the center and left of Iran’s political institutions, leaving
only the clergy.  Both human rights and state sponsored terrorism remain serious
problems in Iran and the Middle East.  According to State Department reports,  Iran’s
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and Ministry of Intelligence and Security Forces have
been directly involved in terrorist acts, and continue to support Palestinian groups with
leadership cadres in Syria and Lebanese Hizballah to use terrorism in pursuit of their
goals (see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007, Chapter 3 - State
Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra, at 1-5; Country Reports on terrorism 2008,
Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra, at 1-2).  State Department
repots claim Iranian authorities continue to provide military support and guidance to
some Iraqi militant groups that target Coalition and Iraqi security forces and Iraqi civilians
(see Country Reports on terrorism 2008, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism
Overview, id.).
 Long estranged from the West, Khomeini’s regime charted regional goals that
curtail the presence of the U.S. and other outside powers in the region.  Iran’s Islamic
foreign policy continues to stress (1) vehement anti-U.S. and ant-Israel positions, (2)
6
elimination of outside influence in the region, (3) support for Muslim political movements
abroad, (4) critical support to non-state terrorist groups, and (5) considerable increase in
diplomatic contacts with developing countries (see U.S. Dept. of State Background Note
on Iran, supra; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Chapter 3 - State
Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra; Country Reports on Terrorism 2007, Chapter 3 -
State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra).  In this vein, Iran maintains regular
diplomatic and commercial relations with Russia and the former Soviet republics.  Of
special U.S. concern has been Russian sales of military equipment and technology to
Iran (see  U.S. Dept. of State Background Note on Iran, id., at 8).
Potential obstacles to improved relations between Iran and the U.S. include
Iranian efforts to acquire technology that could be used to develop nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction; its support for and involvement in international
terrorism; its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its
dismal human rights record (see The National Security Strategy of the United States of
America, President of the United States (March 2006), supra; The Iranian Regime: A
Challenge to the World, U.S. Department of State (May 2006); Making America Safer by
Defeating Extremists in the Middle East, Statement by President of the United States
(August 2007); President Bush Delivers State of the Union Address (January 2008);
President Bush’s Message to the Congress of the United States (March 2008);  Annual
Threat Assessment for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (February 2008)).
State Department country reports cite significant restrictions on the right of
citizens to change their government, summary executions (minors included),
disappearances, torture and severe punishments (such as amputations and flogging),
violence by vigilante groups with ties to the government, poor prison conditions, arbitrary
arrest and detention (including prolonged solitary confinement), lack of judicial
independence and fair public trials, political prisoners and detainees, excessive
government violence in Kurdish areas and unknown groups in Arab regions of the
country, severe restrictions on civil liberties and freedom of religion, official corruption,
government transparency deficiencies, legal and societal discrimination against women,
ethnic and religious minorities, trafficking in persons, incitement of anti-Semitism, severe
restriction of workers’ rights, and child labor (see Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices-2007, Iran, supra). 
Addressing reports of human rights violations in Iran, the UN General Assembly
adopted a human rights resolution on Iran in December 2005 that expressed serious
concern at the continuing use of torture in Iran and cruel, trafficking in persons, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, such as floggings and amputations, as well as
public executions (see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran, id., at 3-
24). 
Even though Iran’s constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, these
practices remain common. Its regular and paramilitary security forces that share
responsibility with Iranian police for law enforcement and maintaining order are reported
to have committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years (see Country
7
Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran, id.). Security forces responsible for
arrest and detention often do not inform family members of a prisoner’s welfare and
locations, and often deny visits by family members and counsel.
State Department travel warnings urge U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks
of travel to Iran (see U.S. State Department Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, supra), a
country with which the U.S. does not currently have diplomatic or consular relations.
Citing Iran’s non-recognition of dual citizenship and general declination to permit the
Swiss to provide protective services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals,
Americans who travel to Iran are strongly encouraged to register through the State
Department’s travel registration website (see U.S. State Department Travel Warning,
Iran, 2008, id.).
Dual citizens residing or visiting in Iran are subject to all Iranian laws affecting
U.S. citizens, as well as laws applicable to persons of Iranian nationality that impose
special obligations on citizens of that country (see U.S. State Department Travel
Warning, Iran, 2008, id.; Country Specific Information, Iran, 2007, supra).  Dual nationals
remain subject to Iran’s military service requirements and can be conscripted into service
while on Iranian soil. While such conscripted service seems unlikely to confront
Applicant, given his age and longstanding U.S. citizenship, it remains a possibility.
Reports indicate, too, that Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign visitors
under surveillance, and even arrest or detain Iranian-Americans suspected of “acting
against national security”  (see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran,
supra, at 5-6; Country Specific Information, Iran, 2007,  id., at 2-3). 
 Because the Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals as Iranian citizens, regardless of there U.S. naturalization
status, dual nationals who enter Iran only on a U.S. passport risk detention absent
persuasive proof of their formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship (see Country
Specific Information, Iran, 2007,  id. at 1).  Because Applicant himself does not know
how the Iranian authorities might consider his Iranian citizen status, he cannot be
absolved of detention risk should he choose to travel to Iran on his U.S. passport.  
Character assessments
Applicant has received excellent endorsements from program managers and
other colleagues who have worked with him worked with him closely and attest to his
good character.  Their assessments of Applicant reflect positively on his judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness (see ex. A).
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
8
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in
U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest.  Adjudication under the this Guideline can and
should considered the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism” (see
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6).
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
9
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Born and raised in Iran, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996.  He
met his wife (a dual citizen with Iran) in 1996, and married her in 1999.  Security
concerns principally focus on Applicant’s immediate and extended family members who
are Iranian citizens residing in Iran.  Applicant and his wife and family have deep roots in
Iran, a country historically known to practice terrorism, and to exercise repression and
human rights abuses against its own citizens, as well as dual citizens who visit the
country.
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s mother and
siblings on his side of the family who are citizens of Iran and reside there, as well as his
wife’s family members who are citizens and residents of Iran, might be subject to undue
foreign influence by Iranian government authorities to access classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control.  
By virtue of the Iranian citizenship and residency of the family members of both
Applicant and his wife, they present potential heightened security risks covered by
disqualifying condition  (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence.
The citizenship/residence status of these family members in Iran pose potential concerns
for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise
sensitive or classified information under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Because none of Applicant’s family or W’s family have any identified Iranian prior
military or government service, no consideration of DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between
the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information,” is warranted.  To be sure, from what is known from the presented evidence,
none of W’s immediate family residing in Iran have any political affiliations with the
Iranian government or military, have any history to date of being subjected to any
coercion or influence, or appear to be vulnerable to the same. 
10
Still, upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his immediate and
extended family members residing in Iran, and his wife’s dual Iranian citizenship and
deep family roots in Iran (which include all of her siblings who still reside there), risks of
undue foreign influence on Applicant, his own siblings, his wife and her family members
residing in Iran, cannot be safely discounted. Applicant/W’s contacts with their family
members appear to be substantial and ongoing, and clearly of the magnitude that could
make them subject to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under
Guideline B.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing security clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of
foreign influence.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing.  Personnel
security assessments continue to be governed by the same Change 4 requirements of
the Directive for appraising the security risks associated with the individual's having
family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of country risks and
information available from public sources.
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, though, the new ones do take into account
the country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in
gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create
a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter. 
As demonstrated, Iran has long been known to be a repressive country, who has
committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years, and shown little
respect for the rule of law.  The U.S. has no diplomatic relations with Iran.  Iran remains
a country on the State Department ‘s state terrorist list, and one with a known history of
hostage taking and human rights abuses of wide magnitude and scope. Iran is
consistently characterized as a country historically hostile to American political and
security interests since the 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran and ensuing establishment of an
Islamic republic with close ties and support to non-state terrorist groups.  Based on
reported terrorist activities in the country and in other countries in the region with support
links to Iran, Iran cannot be deemed to provide an acceptable political and security
environment for managing hostage risks.  Without such assurances, no reasonable
conclusions can be reached that Applicant’s immediate and extended family members
are not in a position to be exploited by Iranian authorities.
 Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant nor his wife and their respective
11
family members residing in Iran can be characterized as sufficiently insulated from
potential pressures and influence from the Iranian government and military officials to
warrant application of this mitigating condition.  Of some benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b),
“there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” 
Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to the
U.S., while considerable, are not enough to neutralize all potential conflicts that are
implicit in his relationships with his spouse, his siblings, and his wife’s family members.
MC 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has
some applicability, too, based on Applicant own infrequent contacts with his wife’s family
members residing in Iran.  Application of MC 8(c) is necessarily limited, though, because
of the frequent exchanges applicant and W maintain with their family members residing
in Iran.
Two other mitigating conditions have mixed application to Applicant’s situation.
MC 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s
assurances of reporting his travel plans to Sudan, and his long absence from the country
(no visits since 1996).  But there is really no documented record of Applicant’s prior
reporting of his contacts with members of his family and his wife’s family, respectively, to
warrant any more than minimal consideration at this time.  The same holds true with
respect to MC 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”  The extent of
Applicant’s and W’s financial interests and expectancies (e.g., inheritance) in Iran is not
fully known at this time.  
Given that Iran remains a hostile country with no diplomatic relations with the
U.S., and one that lacks a secure infrastructure and track record for respecting human
rights and the rule of law, the risk of a pressure or influence situation involving an
immediate or extended family member of Applicant’s cannot be safely discounted.  Iran’s
strategic location and political character, when coupled with Applicant’s own
demonstrated preference for the country, conduce to create security concerns over risks
of direct or indirect pressure or influence of an immediate or extended family member of
Applicant’s by Iranian authorities.  These concerns are not sufficiently mitigated to permit
safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of exploitation and
pressure attributable to his familial relationships and contacts with his immediate and
extended family members domiciled  in Iran.
12
Whole person assessment is not available either to minimize Applicant’s exposure
to conflict of interests with his Iranian family members.  While Applicant is not aware of
any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of his, or his wife’s, family members
might be exposed to, the potential risk of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought
to bear on him, his wife, or any of their respective family members remains uncertain,
and therefore potentially considerable. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with
his wife and their respective family members residing in Iran are insufficiently mitigated
to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue
influence attributable to his familial relationships in the Sudan.  Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a through 1.f of
Guideline B.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to sub-paragraph 2.g due to
the relative lack of any hostile threat posed by Applicant’s travels to the UAE to visit his
family.
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.f: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
