                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-00403 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Fahryn Hoffman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 12 past due accounts totaling approximately $32,000. Applicant 
has been making payments on the two largest, disputes one debt, has reached 
repayment agreements on four additional debts, and intends to pay all his obligations. 
Applicant has successfully mitigated financial considerations and personal conduct 
concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 26, 2007, detailing security 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
concerns under Guideline F, fianancial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. 
 
 On January 8, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On January 31, 2008, I was assigned the case. On April 
11, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing to be held on April 
21, 2008. For good cause, a continuance was granted. On June 6, 2008, DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on June 27, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through D, which were admitted into 
evidence. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On 
July 17, 2008, additional documents were received. Department Counsel did not object 
to the material, which was admitted into evidence as Ex. E. On July 18, 2008, the 
transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.e and ¶ 
2.a of the SOR and was without sufficient information to either admit or deny the 
allegation in ¶ 1.c. He admitted the remaining allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old truck driver who has worked for a defense contractor 
since October 1992 and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant and his wife 
are long haul truckers. In March 2008, a favorable security clearance determination was 
made as to Applicant’s wife (ISCR Case Number 07-01646). Applicant recently 
purchased a new truck, a 2008 Peterbilt on which is owed $145,000. Applicant pays 
$3,000 monthly for the truck tractor payment and $700 for the trailer.  
 
In March 2008, Applicant sold his previous truck, a 1998 Peterbilt, for $31,000. 
Approximately $13,000 of the proceeds was paid to move the sleeper portion of the cab 
from the old truck to the new truck. Applicant was off the road for six weeks while the 
new truck was prepared. (Ex. A) An additional $16,000 was applied to the truck 
payment on their new truck.  
 
 From 1994 to 2000, Applicant’s wife was unemployed and receiving Social 
Security disability due to migraine headaches and Crohn’s disease. She was unable to 
assist Applicant with the driving. In May 2008, she was released by her doctor to return 
to driving their truck. Applicant’s new truck is so configured to allow her to resume truck 
driving. Previously, her doctor provided her with a limited supply of migraine medication. 
When traveling and her medication ran out, she got migraine headaches that resulted in 
emergency room visits, with associated medical fees. Now that her doctor has agreed to 
provide her with a full month’s prescription she anticipates emergency room visits will be 
eliminated when they are on the road.  
 
In March 2003, his wife experienced a slip and fall in a store breaking her knee 
cap resulting in numerous surgeries and treatments. She has had over 77 treatments. 
Medicare paid 80% of the medical bills. The creditor listed in ¶ 1.h is collecting for 26 
 
 
 
3
medical debts totaling approximately $6,500. Payments on this debt have been made 
on his debts for more than 18 months. (Ex. D) Monthly payments are reviewed every six 
months. Monthly payments started at $250, were raised to $400, and then to $800. In 
July 2008, the monthly payments were reevaluated and lowered to $450.  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s debts follows: 
  
 
 
 
Creditor 
 
Amount  
 
Current Status 
a Federal tax lien. 
 
$19,377 Applicant was paying $500 per month and 
has now engaged a company to negotiate a 
settlement with the IRS. (Ex. E) 
b Medical bill. $236 Applicant has agreed to pay $50 per month. 
(Ex. E) 
c Collection agency.  $431 Collection agency list the amount owed as 
$250. Applicant sent five post dated checks 
which will be cashed at $50 per month. (Ex. 
E) 
d Collection agency. $1,727 Collection offered to settle the debt for 
$1,170, which Applicant accepted and will 
pay $195 per month. (Ex. E) 
e Computer purchased 
through the telephone 
company.  
$1,425 Applicant disputes this debt as the computer 
was defective and returned to the company.  
f Collection agency. $124 Collection agency has agreed to accept five 
monthly payments on this debt. (Ex. E) 
g Hospital debt. $485 Applicant has agreed to make monthly 
payments on the debt. (Ex. E) 
h Collection agency.  
 
$6,476 Applicant is making $250 monthly payments. 
i Collection agency.  $391 Applicant contacted collection agency and 
learned it no longer had the debt. (Ex. E) 
j Collection agency. 
 
$474 Applicant contacted creditor and is waiting a 
response. (Ex. 4) 
k Collection agency. $543 Same collection agency as j.  
l Collection agency 
 
$221 The telephone number listed in the credit 
report is a nonworking number. Applicant is 
attempting to locate the creditor. (Ex. E) 
  $31,910 Total debt listed in SOR 
 
 The court date for his wife’s lawsuit was set for August 2008 with mediation in the 
matter started on January 2008. (Ex. A) The lawsuit has now been reset for June 2009.  
 
 Applicant and his wife owed the IRS approximately $19,000 (SOR ¶ 1.a) for tax 
years 2001, 2002, and 2003. Since November 2005, they have been paying the IRS 
$500 per month to address this debt. Until recently the amount was automatically 
 
 
 
4
deducted as a voluntary levy. The amount is now paid directly by Applicant. Applicant 
has been paying the IRS monthly for two and a half years. Applicant has recently 
employed a law firm (Ex. E) who is attempting to negotiate a settlement of the remaining 
IRS debt. Applicant is current on his state tax. (Ex. C) 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,425) for the 1999 purchase of 
a computer through a telephone company. When the computer arrived it was defective. 
A service representative came to Applicant’s home and attempted to fix the hard drive 
on the machine. He was unable to fix the computer and suggested Applicant return it to 
the company, which was done. Since returning the computer, Applicant has disputed 
the debt. (Ex. A) 
 
 Applicant contacted the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,727). The creditor offered 
to settle the matter for $1,077, which Applicant accepted. (Ex. B and E) 
 
 Applicant previously contacted the hospital about the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g 
($485).  The hospital agreed to send Applicant a statement as to the balance but failed 
to do so.  Applicant again contacted the hospital and has agreed to pay the debt in 
monthly statements. (Ex. E) 
 
Applicant denied deliberately failing to list his debts that had ever been more than 
180 days delinquent, or were currently more than 90 days delinquent. When completing 
his SF 86, Applicant knew he had bills, but was unaware any were delinquent. Question 
35 asked if he had been subject to a wage garnishment during the previous seven 
years. He answered “no” because the action to repay his tax obligation was a voluntary 
wage assignment and not a wage garnishment.  
 
Applicant’s income fluctuates depending on the cargo carried, the number trips 
made, the number of miles traveled, and how many people are driving. When both 
Applicant and his wife are driving, they receive approximately 20% more per mile 
driven. 
 
As long-haul, over the road truck drivers there are periods of time when Applicant 
and his wife are away from home for extended periods. Additionally, they live in a trailer 
park and should any mail fail to list the lot number, the mail is not delivered, but returned 
to the post office. Applicant stresses the importance of the lot number to his creditors, 
but is aware mail has been returned because the lot number is missing.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F (financial considerations) a security concern typically exists 
due to significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
6
                                                          
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.2 
 
 An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, 
negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed approximately $32,000 to 12 creditors. Disqualifying 
Conditions (DC) ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 19(c) “a history 
of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial problems 
were contributed to by numerous surgeries and medical treatment related to Applicant’s 
wife’s migraine headaches and her slip and fall that destroyed her knee cap.  
 
Applicant’s wife has only recently been medically cleared to return to driving, 
which will result in a 20% increase in their mileage amount received. His wife’s doctor 
has also agreed to provide his wife with a full month’s prescription of migraine medicine 
which will result in fewer emergency room visits. AG & 20(a) applies. 
 
AG & 20(b), Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,@ applies. Applicant’s wife experienced 
unexpected medical emergencies with both migraine headaches and her knee injury 
with the associated financial burden. Applicant and his wife have paid what they were 
able to on their debts. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 3@ Applicant has paid a 
2 Revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) ¶ 18. 
3In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 22, 2008) the Appeal Board explained how financial 
responsibility under Guideline F can be demonstrated: 
 
 
 
7
                                                                                                                                                                                          
number of the medical bills. Applicant has been making monthly payments on his two 
largest debts (SOR ¶ 1.a, $19,000 and SOR ¶ 1.h, $6,476), which represents more than 
80% of his total debt obligation. He has been paying one creditor for more than 18 
months and paying the IRS for more than two and a half years.  
 
Applicant has agreed to make monthly payments on four additional debts (SOR ¶ 
1.b, $236; SOR ¶ 1.d, $1,727; ¶ 1.f, $124; and, SOR ¶ 1.g, $485). Applicant is waiting 
for a response from the collection agency that has two debts (SOR ¶ 1.j, $474 and SOR 
¶ 1.k, $543) Applicant has contacted the two remaining creditors. The collection agency 
for debt SOR ¶ 1.i, $391 no longer has the debt. The credit report telephone number for 
the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.l, $221 is not working. Applicant is attempting to locate the 
creditors for these two debts.  
 
AG & 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant disputes he owes the debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,425). Applicant purchased a computer that was defective. When the 
computer could not be fixed, Applicant followed the repair person’s suggestion and 
returned the defective computer to the company.  
 
 Should his wife receive a settlement on her slip and fall case, the remaining bills 
could easily be paid. Even without settlement Applicant has arranged payments with 
other creditors in the past and his long history of payments indicates his creditors will be 
paid. The remaining debts do not raise concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The allegations under Guideline E, personal conduct, are refuted. The 
Government has shown Applicant's answers to questions 35, 38 and 39 were incorrect, 
but this does not prove the Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information about his 
 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of “‘meaningful 
track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not required, 
as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 
2006). The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his 
actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) (“Available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). 
Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
 
 
8
finances. The Applicant has denied intentional falsification. In July 2004, when 
completing his SF 86, Applicant did not list any debts as having ever been more than 
180 days delinquent or being currently more than 90 days delinquent. At the time he 
completed his SF 86, he knew he had debts, but did not believe any of them were 
delinquent. He did not list a wage garnishment in response to question 35 because his 
payment to the IRS was a voluntary wage assignment and not a garnishment. 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security clearance 
is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification 
must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. An 
omission concerning delinquent debt is not deliberate if the person did not know of their 
existence or failed to remember them. The Applicant was unaware his accounts were 
delinquent when completing his SF 86. Applicant’s job took him away from home for 
long periods of time, thereby limiting his access to his mail. Additionally, if his mail failed 
to list his lot number, the mail was not delivered.  
 
Applicant’s explanation of his negative answers on his SF 86 was plausible. After 
hearing his testimony, observing his demeanor, and evaluating all the evidence of 
record, I found his testimony credible on the falsification issue. I am satisfied he did not 
intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries. The majority were for medical treatment and taxes. 
 
 
 
9
 
Applicant is making monthly payments on the two largest debts and reached a 
repayment agreement on four others. These debts cannot be a source of improper 
pressure or duress. Applicant is addressing his debts. He is attempting to locate the 
creditors of the remaining two debts. The issue is not simply whether all his debts are 
being paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a) (1)) Applicant is paying his bills. The length of 
time he has been making payments gives me confidence he will continue to make 
payment until his obligations are paid. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.l: For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a- 2.c: For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
