                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-05134 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J 
(Criminal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On December 21, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 6, 2008, was provided to her, 
and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.2 Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day 
time period after receiving a copy of the FORM. The case was originally assigned to 
another administrative judge on June 16, 2008, and due to case load considerations 
was reassigned to me on July 18, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a., 2.a. and 2.b., and 
neither admitted or denied 3.a.3 She admitted the remaining SOR allegations. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old Counselor and Director of Student Services, who has 
worked for her government contractor employer since July 2005. She has also been 
employed as Chief Executive Officer and President of another company since April 
2004.4 She holds a Certificate in Advanced Graduate Studies awarded in May 2001, 
and has completed course work for a Ph.D. in Education, but has not completed her 
thesis. Applicant was married in June 1987 and that marriage ended by divorce in 
February 1993. She has an 18-year-old daughter from that marriage.5 
 
 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
2 DOHA transmittal letter is dated Mar. 6, 2008; and Applicant received the FORM on March 14. 
The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit 
information. 
3 Although Applicant did not admit or deny this allegation in her Answer, she did provide an 
explanation stating in part, “my indebtedness has justification in mitigating circumstances” in her Answer, 
Item 2.  
4 Items 3 and 4. 
5 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 – 2006 
meframe.  
 
tory school, her past underemployment, and that she is caring 
r her very ill mother.12  
 
is 
heel chair bound. The second aunt’s husband is scheduled to have heart surgery.13  
 
                                                          
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her e-QIP,6 her April 2006 credit bureau report,7 her April 2007 
credit bureau report,8 her February 2008 credit bureau report,9 and her September 
2007 Responses to Interrogatories.10 The government established by Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that Applicant had or has 27 delinquent debts 
totaling $116,521 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.aa.) Of those debts, 12 are defaulted student loans. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. – 1.m.) Per the April 2007 credit bureau report, a charged off department 
store credit account in the amount of $5,466 has been settled and shows a zero 
balance.11 (SOR ¶ 1.t.) The majority of these debts became delinquent in 2005
ti
Applicant offered no documentation that any of her debts have been paid, that 
she has set up payment plans, nor has she submitted any evidence that she contacted 
any creditors or sought credit counseling or that her debts are or will be resolved. In her 
Responses to Interrogatories, Applicant submitted evidence that she was unemployed 
from June 2002 to December 2003 following her voluntary termination as Dean of 
Student Life at a prepara
fo
She also submitted a letter from a physician describing her mother’s illness, 
which includes metastastic cancer, sleep apnea, and congestive heart failure. The 
physician also stated that in addition to Applicant caring for her mother, she is/or will be 
caring for two aunts. One aunt has suffered a stroke and has Paget’s disease and 
hypertension and is unable to drive. A second aunt has rheumatoid arthritis and 
w
Applicant’s documentation does not mention when and to what extent Applicant 
is or has been providing care for her family members. Applicant’s Answer states that at 
10 Item 4 (contains Office of Personnel Management (OPM) unsworn declaration conducted on 
August hich was ratified as true and correct by Applicant on September 18, 2007.)  
 6. 
 2. 
6 Item 3. 
7 Item 7. 
8 Item 6. 
9 Item 5. 
10, 2006, w
11 Item
12 Id. 
13 Item
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
least a
April 2006. In addition, the record evidence reflects the debts 
lleged in ¶ 1.b. through 1.p. were all at least 90 days delinquent when Applicant 
completed her e-QIP.  
e guidelines list 
otentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evalua
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
liable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making
 that are reasonable, logical and based on 
e evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
                                                          
s of December 2007, as a result of her providing care for these family members, 
she is unable to work.14  
In her April 2006 e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” to Sections 28(a) and 28(b) 
(asking whether in the last seven years she had been 180 days delinquent on any 
debts, and whether she was currently delinquent on any debts, respectively.) She 
explained in her August 2006 OPM Interview that her failure to answer the form 
correctly was due to an “oversight.”15 Applicant’s December 2006 Answer stated, 
“When I started the process of getting a security clearance in the summer of 2004, my 
financial delinquencies were not 120 or 90 days behind. By the time my information got 
processed I was behind due to my inability to work.”16 The record evidence reflects that 
the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a., 1.n., 1.o., and 1.p. were all at least 180 days delinquent 
within seven years of 
a
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicativ
p
ting an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person 
re
 a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions
th
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
14 Id. 
15 Item 4. 
16 Item 2. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 decision.” 
irective ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
formation. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
rmissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classif
ms of 
e national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executi 2968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
alysis 
  : 
              
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”17 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
D
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).18 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified in
pe
ied information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in ter
th
ve Order 1
 
An
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),19 the government’s concern is
                                            
17 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reason
ight accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the reco
ase No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is somet
able 
mind m rd.” 
ISCR C hing 
less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
18 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
19  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
Applicant admitted the majority of the 27 debts alleged under this Guideline 
(SOR 
tation supporting denial of this debt. As noted supra, the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
.t. is resolved. Her admissions and evidence submitted by the government substantiate 
the rem vidence, I am unable to glean any 
further information, favorable or unfavorable, with regard to identified financial concerns. 
 
fying 
include
 
) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
sion, expense account fraud, 
ling deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
 
Failure 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
¶¶ 1.b. – 1.aa.). She denied one debt (SOR ¶ 1a.). She did not submit any 
documen
1
aining debts. In the absence of credible e
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disquali
: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; 
 
(c
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax eva
fi
of trust; 
 
(e
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by 
subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
cial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions listed supra, two are 
pplicable: ¶ 19(a): ”inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 19(c): “a history of 
not me 6 of the 27 debts 
alleged, and those remaining debts exceed $100,000. The majority of those debts 
becam ment 
plan, a ts on 
any of 
 
 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
dgment; 
erson's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
ownturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
o repay overdue creditors or 
therwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
fic definition of what constitutes 
ecent” conduct. Applicant has 26 delinquent debts, which remained unpaid and not in 
a payment plan at the time of her hearing. Moreover, she has not shown sufficient effort 
and/or unusual circumstances to establish her financial problems are “unlikely to recur.” 
Her o
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
Of the Finan
a
eting financial obligations.” The government substantiated 2
e delinquent in the 2005-2006 timeframe. Applicant did not submit a pay
 budget, nor did she show that she has the ability to begin making paymen
these debts. 
¶
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
ju
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the p
d
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort t
o
 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Guideline ¶ 20(a) does not provide a temporal or speci
“r
verall conduct with her creditors casts doubt on her current reliability, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
trustwo
nduct does not warrant full application of Guideline ¶ 20(b) 
ecause she did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her delinquent 
debts.
does not receive credit under Guideline ¶ 20(c) because she did not 
ceive financial or credit counseling, and she has no payment plans with her creditors. 
There 
e] evidence of actions to resolve the issue” with respect to her 
ree delinquent debts. In sum, she has not demonstrated sufficient effort to resolve 
              
rthiness, and good judgment. Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as 
a whole,20 I conclude Guideline ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant disclosed sufficient information to support partial application of 
Guideline ¶ 20(b). She was unemployed for a portion of the time these debts were 
accrued and became delinquent, and has been a caregiver for her family members. The 
record did not disclose any information indicating her actions were in bad faith. 
However, Applicant’s co
b
21 She has not maintained communication with her creditors or made any 
payments on 26 debts.  
 
Applicant 
re
is no record evidence of “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.”  
 
Guideline ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply because there is insufficient information to 
establish that Applicant showed good faith in the resolution of her debts.22  Guideline ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable. She did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis 
of the dispute or [provid
th
financial concerns to merit full application of any mitigating conditions under the 
adjudicative guidelines. 
                                            
20See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis all debts are considered as a whole.   
21“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside her control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner 
4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
repay 
overdue
showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
 claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 
22The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
one of the six 
inancial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable. Based on the 
problems are likely to be a concern in the future. 
oreover, her financial problems are recent, not isolated, and ongoing. 
uideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under 
 
ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
egard of 
e debts, and the lack of credibility of her excuses. She knew the importance of 
accura d to 
provide material to making an informed security decision.  
 
tement, or 
imilar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
              
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,23 I conclude n
F
available evidence, her financial 
M
 
G
Guideline E (Personal Conduct),24 the government’s concern is as follows: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
As noted, Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose truthful responses to questions 
28(a), and 28(b) is not credible. Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in 
my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant=s age, her level of education, 
her employment history, the number and value of the debts, her long term disr
th
te completion of her security clearance application, and nevertheless faile
 information that was 
¶ 16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history sta
s
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
                                            
23  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. J
. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysi
an. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd s for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
24 Guideline 18. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
bined with all available information 
upports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
is includes 
ut is not limited to consideration of: 
) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
tion, unauthorized release of 
ensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
ivities which, if known, may affect the person's 
ersonal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
tes and may serve as a 
asis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
f the Personal Conduct Disqualification Conditions listed supra , two are 
applica  of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . .”, and ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct or 
concea ty to 
exploit
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when com
s
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. Th
b
 
(1
confidentiality, release of proprietary informa
s
 
(2) disruptive, 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in act
p
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United Sta
b
service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
O
ble ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
lment of information about one=s conduct, that creates a vulnerabili
ation, manipulation, or duress . . . .” 
 
¶ 17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 omission, or concealment was 
aused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
ully; 
teps to alleviate the 
tressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
dgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
I specifically considered all Guideline E Mitigating Conditions and conclude that 
ufficient to apply any of the MCs.  
 
 nder Guideline E (Personal Conduct),  the government’s concern is as follows: 
 
 
              
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate,
c
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthf
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive s
s
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, ju
none apply. Applicant=s falsification is recent, and her favorable information is not 
s
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
25U
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
                                            
25 Guideline ¶ 30. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
he government established its case under Guideline J by showing that 
Applica nder 
Guideline E, that Applicant deliberately falsified her 2006 e-QIP. Her falsification of the 
security clearance application is material and a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001, a felony.26 
 31. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
honorable 
onditions; 
) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
Of the Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed supra, two are applicable: 
am required to consider Applicant’s overall 
uestionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the 
ior is recent; the 
kelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s explanations concerning the circumstances of the 
inciden
 
              
T
nt was involved in this offense in 2006. I find, as discussed above u
 
¶
disqualifying include: 
 
(a
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dis
c
 
(c
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d
 
e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. 
 
¶ 31(a): “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and ¶ 31(c) “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 Applicant’s recent falsification brings to the forefront the criminal conduct 
concerns raised by her past behavior. I 
q
SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which her behav
li
ts alleged; and her rehabilitation.27 
                                            
26 It is a criminal offense to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statement or representation, or knowingly make or use a false writing in any matter within the 
jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Security clearances are 
within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Egan, 484 U.S. at 
527 (discussing 18 U.S.C. § 1001.) 
 
27 ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
 unlikely to recur 
nd does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
on's life; 
licant’s criminal behavior is 
cent and not isolated. Considering her criminal behavior, the nature and seriousness 
of her
bout her ability and willingness to 
llow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified information. Her recent falsification 
clude Applicant=s behavior shows questionable 
dgment, lack of reliability, and untrustworthiness.  
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”28 and 
              
¶ 32. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
(a
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
a
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the pers
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement; and 
 
(e) potentially disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) above, may not be 
mitigated unless, where meritorious circumstances exist, the Secretaries 
of the Military Departments or designee; or the Directors of Washington 
Headquarters Services (WHS), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 
National Security Agency (NSA), Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) or designee, has granted a waiver. 
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find App
re
 misconduct, her falsification of the e-QIP, and her disregard for her financial 
obligations, I find her favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate Guideline J 
security concerns. Her behavior raises questions a
fo
and lack of candor weigh against a finding or rehabilitation and positive behavioral 
changes. I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Additionally, for the same reasons outlined under the discussions of Guidelines 
F, E and J, incorporated herein, I con
ju
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
                                            
28 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
supporting evidence, my applicat t factors under the Adjudicative 
rocess, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
Formal Findings 
et forth in the SOR, 
e 3 o  
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.t.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b.:  Against Appicant 
 
   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circum the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national plicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
                                                    
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
ion of the pertinen
P
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations s
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosur f the Directive, are:
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.t.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u. – 1.aa. Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:
 
stances presented by 
security to grant Ap
 
 
 
