                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08673 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s good faith efforts to repay creditors established sufficient financial 
responsibility to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Standard Form (SF) 86.1 On October 28, 2007, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to her,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
1  GE 1.  
 
2  GE 1 is the source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The 
SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 3, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 14, 2008. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 5, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection (Tr. 20). Applicant testified on her own behalf, and 
presented 15 exhibits, marked AE 1 through 15, which were received without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 14, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.l with 
explanations. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.f through 1.k. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 25 years old. She has never married and does not have any children. 
She has no police record, and there is no evidence she has used or trafficked in illegal. 
She attended college from 2000 to 2004, and received a Bachelor of Arts degree. While 
in college, she worked part-time and summer jobs to pay for her expenses. Since 
graduating from college in July 2004, she has worked for two different Government 
contractors providing administrative support to Government agencies. She has worked 
for her current employer since September 2006. Because of her good performance, she 
was selected to do the training and development for all new contractor specialists (Tr. 7, 
36-37). She has been attending cosmetology school since December 2007 and plans to 
graduate during the later part of 2009 (Tr. 105). 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her e-QIP, her response to DOHA interrogatories (GE 2), and 
four credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 2004 (GEs 5 & 6), 2006 (GE 4), and 2007 (GE 
3). The SOR alleges 12 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately 
3  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
3 
 
$25,000. Only two of the alleged debts are supported by the government’s evidence 
because some debts were duplicated and three did not belong to Applicant.  
 
The Government conceded SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.l allege the same 
delinquent debt (Tr. 43). SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.l were consolidated under SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant initially included SOR ¶ 1.a in a debt management agreement she established 
in 2005 to pay her delinquent debts. When she found out the debt was related to 
telephone services provided by a company she never had an account with, she 
disputed the account (Tr. 48). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is Applicant’s debt. She co-signed a car note for her mother and her 
mother defaulted on the payments (Tr. 49). In early 2007, Applicant contacted the 
creditor and agreed to pay $200 a month. She has been honoring her payment 
schedule. From May 2007 to February 2008, she paid approximately $1,800 (AE 11, at 
11-23). 
 
The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.h belonged to Applicant’s 
twin sister and not to Applicant (Tr. 78-79). See AE 11 at 4 (debt settled and paid off by 
her sister), and AE 7.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g concerns a car Applicant purchased around 1999-2000, which was 
totaled in an accident. Applicant retained an attorney to file suit on her behalf. She 
credibly testified her attorney advised her not to make any payments on the car note 
pending the resolution of her suit. Ultimately, the suit was settled for a small amount of 
money which Applicant used to fund her debt management agreement payments (Tr. 
66-71). Around August 2007, Applicant established a payment plan with the creditor of 
SOR ¶ 1.g. She has been honoring her payment schedule. From August 2007 to 
February 2008, she paid approximately $700 towards this debt (AE 11, at 23-29). 
 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k, Applicant credibly testified SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.k were two different delinquent debts she had which were in collection by the same 
agency. In 2003, the collection agency consolidated the debts into SOR ¶ 1.j, and 
obtained a judgment against her. Applicant included the judgment in her debt 
management agreement and paid if off. The Government conceded the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.j was paid (Tr. 88). 
 
Applicant acquired most of her delinquent/charged off debts when she was 
young and immature -- around the later part of high school and during college. She 
testified her parents promised to pay for some of her college expenses and they failed 
to do so because of their divorce. In 2005, she realized the extent of her debt, and was 
concerned about the adverse consequences of having bad credit. Applicant made 
lifestyle changes to correct her credit problems which included entering into a debt 
counseling program, monitoring her expenses, and the use of credit.  
 
In May 2005, she sought financial counseling/assistance to pay her debts and 
entered into a debt management agreement contract with a company (AE 12-14). She 
 
 
4 
 
                                                          
successfully completed her debt management agreement contract in April 2007. She 
paid most of her debts with the exception of the two debts remaining in the SOR which 
were not included in the program. She received financial counseling as part of the debt 
management payment process. 
 
Applicant has been living by herself since October 2007. She has a yearly salary 
of around $55,000, and is well regarded by her employer. She takes roommates to help 
her pay the rent ($1,045). Her monthly take home pay is around $3,500. She seems to 
have the financial means necessary to pay for her day-to-day living expenses and to 
continue paying for her old debts. She only carries one credit card (with a low balance) 
which she uses for emergencies. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for her past 
financial indiscretions. She credibly testified she has learned her lesson, and promised 
to avoid future financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                          
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
5  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her SOR 
response, and her response to interrogatories. She acquired numerous debts which 
became delinquent. Two of these debts were outstanding as of the hearing date. The 
government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2005, after realizing the extent of her debts, Applicant took good faith steps to 
correct her financial problems by establishing a debt payment program, receiving 
financial counseling, and making financially responsible lifestyle changes. In 2007, she 
successfully completed her debt payment program. That same year, she established 
payment plans with other creditors not included in her initial debt payment program and 
has continued her financially responsible behavior by honoring her payment obligations. 
Although she has missed some monthly payments, considering the evidence as a 
whole, I find that she has acted in good faith in her efforts to repay creditors. I also find 
that, although she is not debt free, Applicant has shown clear indications that her 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. Based on my evaluation of the 
record evidence as a whole, I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) fully applies and AG ¶ 20(d) partially 
applies because she did not act more aggressively sooner to resolve her debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
 
7 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in her favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation. Aside from her delinquent debts (which are a civil, non-criminal 
issue), she is a law-abiding citizen. She acquired most of her bad debts while in high 
school and college – likely because of her young age and lack of maturity. I believe 
Applicant has matured as demonstrated by her successful completion of the debt 
management program, as well as honoring the payment agreements she established in 
2007. I also believe Applicant has learned the importance of having financial 
responsibility and her past questionable financial behavior is not likely to recur.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.l:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
