1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07–08392
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
J, criminal conduct; F, financial considerations; and E, personal conduct. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 25, 2007, and requested an
administrative determination. On March 12, 2008, the government prepared a File of
Relevant Materials (FORM). It was sent to Applicant on March 17, 2008, and received
May 9, 2009. Applicant was instructed to file any objections or supply any additional
information within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.  She elected not to do so, and
See F.R.C.P. Rule 16(a)(3)(A).1
She was discharged after becoming pregnant with her oldest child.2
2
the case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008. Based upon a review of the FORM,
access to classified information is denied.
Evidentiary and Procedural Rulings
1. The government moved to amend the SOR by adding allegations under
Guideline E that Applicant falsified a 2004 security clearance application by failing to list
a number of charges and a subsequent conviction related to a fraudulent check cashing
scheme and a conviction for driving with a revoked license. The motion was filed five
months after the SOR’s issuance and four months after Applicant’s Answer. Unlike the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,  DoDD 5220.6 does not mandate time limits for1
amending SORs because the preservation of national security transcends technical
court procedure. However, the government still needs to establish good cause for
amending the SOR (Additional Procedural Guidance Enclosure 3.1.17). Here, the
government has already included the criminal involvement, which Applicant allegedly
omitted from her security clearance application, under Guideline J, criminal conduct
Because the nature of the alleged criminal conduct is essentially credibility-related, I can
consider any additional credibility evidence regardless of whether it is alleged in the
SOR. (ISCR Case No. 98-0582 at 9 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 1999)). I conclude the
government does not have good cause to amend the SOR. The motion is denied.
2. SOR subparagraphs 2.a through 2.f allege delinquent financial debts owed to
unidentified creditors. Applicant denied them. SOR subparagraph 3.a alleges, among
other things, that Applicant failed to include these unidentified delinquent debts on her
security clearance application. Although SOR drafting is not held to the strict standards
of criminal indictments, they must, at a minimum, be drafted with enough specificity to
enable applicants to prepare responses. These subparagraphs fail to meet this
minimum threshold, therefore, I resolve them in Applicant’s favor, and will not address
them further. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old single woman with three pre-teen children. She served
in the U.S. Army from 1997 through her honorable discharge in 1999.  For the past2
three years, she has been working for a contractor, assisting families of deceased
service members (Answer).
In 1997, Applicant opened a federal credit union account. In 2000, she presented
three paychecks for the credit union to cash, collectively totaling $3,328, that were
The maker is the person or entity who signs or is identified in the check as the person undertaking to pay it3
(U.C.C. § 3-103(a)(7)).
The drawee bank is the bank from which the check is drawn (U.C.C. §3-103(a)(4)).4
This is the same apartment complex where the treasurer of the non-profit organization, whose checkbook5
was stolen and used by Applicant to forge checks, worked as a property manager.
3
payable to her and endorsed by her (Item 8 at 4-5). The maker of the checks was a
company where Applicant purportedly worked.3
The credit union cashed the checks and posted the money to Applicant’s
account. Over the next three days, Applicant had money wired to her from her credit
union account three times to locations in three different states (Item 7 at pages 4-6).
When the credit union presented the checks to the bank of Applicant’s alleged employer
(the drawee bank)  for reimbursement, it was informed that the account had been4
closed. 
The drawee bank then contacted its corporate security office, who then located
the company where Applicant allegedly worked, and began interviewing members of the
company (Item 7 at 5). The investigation revealed that the company was a small, non-
profit volunteer organization that employed no paid employees (Item 8 at 6). It
maintained a checking account for operating expenses, which it had closed shortly after
the checks were stolen from the treasurer’s car during a break-in. As part of the
investigation, the authorities showed the treasurer Applicant’s signature on the back of
the checks. The treasurer then identified Applicant as a past tenant of an apartment
located in a complex that the treasurer managed, and stated that Applicant vacated the
apartment without paying a $2,000 rent debt (Id.). 
While the investigation was pending, Applicant attempted to cash three more
checks, totaling $6,000, through her credit union (Item 8 at 5). By then, the credit union
was aware of Applicant’s fraudulent scheme, and contacted the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). 
In February 2004, Applicant was indicted for bank fraud, a felony. She pleaded
guilty to the lesser offenses of larceny within a special maritime jurisdiction, and
receiving stolen property within a special maritime jurisdiction (Item 7 at 2). The court,
on November 10, 2004, sentenced her to two years probation, and ordered her to pay
restitution (Item 8 at 3). By November 16, 2006, Applicant had paid the restitution (Id.).
Applicant owes 19 creditors approximately $35,000 in delinquent debt. The debts
include utilities (SOR subparagraphs 2.h, 2.i, 2.l through 2.o, and 2.r), credit accounts
owed to banks and department stores (SOR subparagraphs 2.g, 2.j, 2.t,), medical bills
(SOR subparagraphs 2.g and 2.j), two automobile delinquencies (SOR subparagraphs
2.u, and 2.w), an account owed to an apartment complex (SOR subparagraph 2.x) , and5
SOR subparagraph 2.s is a duplicate of subparagraph 2.g, and SOR subparagraph 2.z is a duplicate of 2.v.6
4
several miscellaneous delinquencies (2.g, 2.k, 2.v, 2.y, 2.aa, and 2.bb). Two of the
debts listed in the SOR, subparagraphs 2.s and 2.z, are duplicates of other SOR debts.6
Applicant admitted SOR subparagraphs 2.h through 2.j, 2.r, and 2.t, and denied
the remainder. She asserts that she has either been satisfying them through payment
plans, or is currently negotiating payment plans. She provided no documentary
evidence supporting these assertions.
As for the denials, Applicant wrote the creditors listed in SOR subparagraphs 2.k
through 2.m, and 2.o, either officially disputing them, or requesting further information.
She provided no evidence of any efforts to contact the creditors of the other denials.
None of the disputed delinquencies were substantiated with documentation.
Applicant answered “No” to Section 38 of a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (QNSP), executed on April 4, 2004, which required her to disclose whether
she had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt within seven years of the
QNSP’s completion. SOR subparagraphs 2(l), 2(x), and 2(aa), either were not 180 days
delinquent or had not been reported as delinquent when Applicant completed the QNSP
(See Item 15 at 6-7). The remainder were more than 180 days delinquent when she
completed the QNSP. Applicant asserts that the omissions were unintentional. She also
did not disclose her 2004 bank fraud indictment and subsequent conviction for
embezzlement theft on the QNSP.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations” (Id.). Here,
Applicant organized a fraudulent scheme that enabled her to swindle more than $3,000
from a federal credit union by presenting invalid checks to be cashed. She did not stop
this activity until the credit union detected the fraud, and refused to cash more invalid
checks. AG ¶31(a), “a single serious crime . . ., “ applies. 
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant
committed a crime of deception, that on its face, is indicative of a lack of honesty. It was
compounded by her failure to disclose it on her security clearance application. She was
convicted less than five years ago. In her Answer, she alluded to pressures in her life
that led her to commit the crime, but did not elaborate. Although she paid restitution, it
has less probative value because it was court-ordered. Her employment at the same job
for three years demonstrates stability, but absent any evidence of her job performance,
has limited probative value. Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct security
concern.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.). Here, Applicant’s extensive financial
problems trigger the application of AG & 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,@ and AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.”
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Her
contention that the acknowledged delinquencies were being satisfied through current or
imminent payment plans was not supported by documentary evidence. Similarly, she
provided no documentary evidence to establish a reasonable basis for the
delinquencies she denied. She has not mitigated the financial considerations security
concern.
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Here, Applicant’s omission of financial delinquencies from her
security clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies. In light of the significant pattern of deception Applicant
demonstrated by executing the fraudulent check cashing scheme, I conclude her
omission from her security clearance application was intentional. AG ¶ 16(a) applies
without mitigation. Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Applicant engaged in illegal acts to generate funds. As the record indicates, she
was financially overextended at the time. Because she is still financially overextended,
the possibility that she may engage in similar future conduct remains unacceptably high.
Evaluating this case using the whole person factors, I conclude that it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.
Clearance is denied.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.g-2.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.s: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.t-2.y: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.z: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.aa-2.bb: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
