                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10409 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
After a 1999 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant established a history of failing to 
meet her financial obligations. As of the date of the hearing, she had 9 accounts, owing 
approximately $66,000, seven of which had been delinquent for many years. Her 
evidence is insufficient to show that she is in control of her finances, is not 
overextended, and has a track record of financial responsibility. She failed to mitigate 
security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Standard Form (SF) 86.1 On November 9, 2007, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
1  GE 1.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
(SOR) to her,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The 
SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 1, 2007 and January 21, 2008, and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on 
February 14, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2008. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled on March 26, 2008. The government offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 19). 
Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented four exhibits, marked Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The Government moved to amend the first sentence of SOR ¶ 1.h, by deleting 
the year “2008,” and substituting “2007.” Applicant did not object. I granted the motion 
(Tr. 13).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 
1.i, which she disputed, and SOR ¶ 1.k, which is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.b. SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.k allege the same offense and were consolidated under SOR ¶ 1.b. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old senior software consultant working for a Government 
contractor. After completing high school, she enlisted in the U.S. Army where she 
served on active duty for three years. She achieved the rank of E-4, and received an 
honorable discharge. While in the Army, she had access to classified information at the 
top secret level. Since her discharge from the Army, she has had continuous access to 
2  GE 1 is the source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
3  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
3 
 
classified information. As of the hearing day, she had access to classified information at 
the secret level. There is no evidence to show that she has ever compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. Nor is there evidence showing that 
she has ever failed to follow the rules and procedures required to handle classified 
information. She has no police record, and there is no evidence she has used or 
trafficked in illegal drugs. 
 
After her discharge from the service, Applicant worked for a Government agency 
for approximately 17 years as an analyst in the Information Technology field. In January 
2005, she resigned her civil service position and started working for defense 
contractors. She has worked for her current employer since April 2006, and needs 
access to classified information to do her job. Applicant is considered a valuable 
employee, and had earned a good reputation among her customers and employer. She 
is considered a diligent and professional employee (AE 1).  
 
Applicant has been married twice and has three children. She was first married in 
1981, and divorced in 1990. She has two daughters from that marriage, ages 24 and 
22. Applicant provides financial support to both of her daughters. Applicant’s oldest 
daughter is attending college. Applicant pays for her daughter’s student loans and helps 
her with college expenses (Tr. 31, 67). Applicant’s younger daughter is not married. She 
has two children of her own, ages three and one. They live with and depend on 
Applicant’s financial support on a frequent basis. Applicant married her second husband 
in 1990 and divorced him in 2003. She has a 17-year-old son from this marriage. He is 
attending high school and is fully dependent on Applicant. She receives $360 month as 
child support from her second husband. Additionally, Applicant’s 77-year-old mother 
lives with and is financially dependent on Applicant (Tr. 32).  
 
Applicant has completed approximately 24 college hours of accounting and six 
hour of mathematics. She last attended college in 1999 (Tr. 5). 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her e-QIP, two credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 2007 (GEs 2 & 
3), and a Docket Sheet for Applicant’s 1999 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition (GE 4). The 
SOR alleges 11 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately $68,600.  
 
Applicant admitted that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($1,118), 1.b ($6,827), 
1.c ($446), 1.d ($1,236), 1.e ($221), and 1.g ($36,049) are her debts and have been 
delinquent for a long period of time. She disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($60), 
claiming she never had an account with this provider, and 1.i ($2,135), claiming the debt 
should have been paid by the seller of her house in accordance with her house 
purchase contract. She never contacted anyone to dispute SOR ¶ 1.f (Tr. 34), and 
claimed she did not know how to formally dispute the debts (Tr. 36). She presented no 
documentary evidence to support her claim concerning SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Regarding her 1999 bankruptcy filing, Applicant explained her financial problems 
were caused by a combination of factors. After divorcing her first husband in 1990, she 
retained many of the debts she personally acquired while married. In addition to 
supporting herself and her children, her parents moved in to live with her after her father 
was diagnosed with cancer. She assisted her parents financially. She remarried in 
1990, and her second husband also had numerous debts from his first marriage. He 
contributed very little to the household finances. The accumulation of her father’s 
medical expenses, her debts, and her then husband’s debt, forced Applicant, her 
husband, and her parents to file for bankruptcy protection. Most of her debts were 
discharged in July 1999.  
 
Applicant described her financial situation from 1999 to 2003 as “pretty good but 
not perfect”. She was making it on a month-to-month basis, but not necessarily making 
all her payments, and sometimes she had to “shuffle” her payments (Tr. 41-42). In 
2003, Applicant made the mistake of buying a home outside of her financial means. 
After the purchase of her home, she struggled every month to pay the mortgage and to 
cover her day-to-day living expenses, and was never able to make ends meet (Tr. 37). 
Applicant could not make her mortgage payments and the house went into foreclosure 
in September 2007 (Tr. 37). Applicant believes she will owe approximately $56,000 as a 
result of the foreclosure, which includes $36,000 she owed for a second mortgage on 
the house (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 
Applicant left her Government employment in 2004 after 17 years of civil service. 
She cashed in her civil service retirement fund because she needed money to pay off 
some of her debts and a car note to have money left over at the end of the month to 
make her mortgage payments (Tr. 61). The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and her 
state assessed taxes and penalties against Applicant for the early withdrawal of her civil 
service retirement fund. This resulted in Applicant acquiring the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.l and 1.m. In September 2006, Applicant entered into a payment agreement with the 
IRS to pay $280 a month. The IRS total initial debt was around $13,000. As of the 
hearing she owed approximately $7,344 (TR. 33-34, 65). In February 2008, she also 
established a payment plan with her State tax authorities to repay $5,600 in monthly 
installments of $400. 
 
Additionally, while working for the Government and after leaving her civil service 
job, Applicant incurred travel and moving expenses associated with her job moves, 
lateral transfers, and servicing customers in different locations. As an example, she 
noted that in January 2005, she moved back to her home state and took a pay cut of 
$35,000 (Tr. 59).  
 
Applicant explained that although her delinquent debts are relatively small 
(except for the foreclosure related debts), she never made any effort to contact her 
creditors and did not pay any of her debts because she could not afford to pay for her 
day-to-day living expenses and her past financial obligations (Tr. 71).  
 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant testified she has not had any periods of unemployment since 1982. 
From 2004 to 2006, Applicant’s yearly salary was approximately $75,000. Since 2006, 
she has been earning approximately $110, 000 (Tr. 65). Her monthly take home pay is 
around $5,800. She receives $360 for child support. Her monthly rent is $1,090. Her 
monthly expenses are as follow: utilities $500; food $500-$750, car insurance $350, car 
payment $450, and cell phone $200. Her son drives a 1999 Sebring she bought used in 
2002. In 2007, Applicant bought a 2006 Sebring because she needed a reliable car to 
perform her job as a traveling consultant (Tr. 45-46). She only carries a company credit 
card which she uses for job related expenses.  
 
In January and August 2007, and in January 2008, Applicant consulted with a 
bankruptcy attorney seeking assistance to resolve her debt. She was advised to wait 
until her house foreclosure is final to determine the extent of her total debt before 
deciding whether bankruptcy is a feasible option (Tr. 51, 75). Other than the bankruptcy 
counseling she received in 1999, 2007, and 2008, Applicant has not participated in any 
financial counseling. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her past financial problems. She asserted she is 
doing the best she can under her circumstances. She noted her honorable service for 
her country, as well as her 17 years of civil service working for a Government agency. 
She has had access to classified information since 1982 without any adverse incidents. 
Through the years, Applicant has disclosed to her supervisors her financial problems 
and claimed her financial problems cannot be used by anyone to exploit or influence 
her. Applicant testified she is a valued employee, and has an excellent reputation 
among her clients and employers for protecting the Government’s interest. Applicant 
asserted she has strong morals, values and integrity, which have allowed her to work in 
positions of trust (Tr. 25). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                          
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is well documented in her credit reports, her SOR 
response, and her testimony. She received Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1999. 
Shortly thereafter, she acquired numerous debts which became delinquent and have 
remained outstanding. As of the hearing date, she had nine outstanding debts totaling 
approximately $66,000. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
 
8 
 
                                                          
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,6 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact 
creditors, or to resolve any of the debts since she acquired them. Nor is there any 
evidence that she has participated in any financial counseling. I specifically considered 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(b): “The conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances”, and 
conclude it applies, but only to a limited extent.  
 
Applicant’s testimony established factors that may be considered as 
circumstances beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., 
being a single mother, and sole provider for her three children, two grandchildren, and 
her mother; the lack of financial assistance from her adult children and her ex-husband 
(while they were married); her father’s medical expenses; her bad business decisions to 
purchase a home beyond her financial means and to cash in her civil service retirement 
fund; and the additional expenses associated with her job lateral transfers, moves, and 
work-related travel. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she has dealt 
responsibly with her financial obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR. 
Applicant has been consistently employed since 1982. From 2004 to 2006 she earned 
around $75,000 a year, and from 2006 to the present she earned approximately 
$110,000 a year. She presented little or no evidence to show paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, or financial assistance/counseling. 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she 
has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that she has taken control of 
her financial situation. Based on the available evidence, she is overextended financially 
and her financial problems are likely to be a concern in the future. Her financial 
problems are recent, not isolated, and ongoing.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
6  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as a whole. 
 
 
9 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). 
Applicant’s 26-years of working for the Government and Government contractors 
weighs in her favor. She has had access to classified information for 26 years and there 
is no evidence that she ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information. She is considered a valued employee who is diligent, responsible, and 
professional. Aside from her delinquent debts (which are a civil, non-criminal issue), she 
is a law-abiding citizen, a concerned mother and grateful daughter. She expressed 
regrets for her financial mistakes and claimed she is trying to correct them.  
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in her case, including Applicant’s 
age, education, maturity, her years working for the Government and defense 
contractors, she demonstrated a lack of judgment and trustworthiness in the handling of 
her financial affairs. Because of her age, education, and job experience she knew or 
should have known of the Government’s security concerns. She failed to deal 
responsibly with her financial obligations, especially after receipt of the SOR. Her failure 
or inability to live within her means and to meet her financial obligations indicates poor 
self-control or an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Her behavior raises 
questions about her reliability, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l and 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
