 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-13868 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and C (Foreign Preference). Applicant mitigated the security concerns under 
Guideline B, but he did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline C. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on January 3, 2006. On 
March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 17, 2008; answered it on 
the same day; and requested an administrative determination without a hearing before 
an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on March 24, 2008. On April 29, 
2008, Department Counsel requested a hearing. The request for a hearing is attached 
to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
May 12, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on May 14, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 29, 2008, scheduling the hearing for June 17, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through L, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until July 1, 2008, to enable him to 
submit additional documentary evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX M, and it was 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX M is attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit III. (HX II is discussed below.) DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 26, 2008. The record closed on July 1, 2008.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Egypt, and Applicant did not object. I took administrative notice as requested by 
Department Counsel (Tr. 46). The request for administrative notice and supporting 
documentation are attached to the record as HX II. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out below in my findings of fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR and offered explanations. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old test technician for a federal contractor. He has worked 
for his current employer since March 2003. He has never held a security clearance (GX 
1 at 26).  
 
Applicant’s supervisor for the past 18 months describes him as respectful, 
dedicated, extraordinarily helpful, and a “take-charge person” who presents creative 
ideas (AX A). A co-worker describes him as dedicated and reliable (AX B). Another co-
worker describes him as “very goal driven” and dedicated (AX C). A third co-worker 
describes him as hard-working, reliable, trustworthy, and candid (AX D). 
 
 Applicant was born and educated in Egypt. He received a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering from Cairo University in 1965. He served in the Egyptian Army 
from May 1968 to July 1982 and retired as a colonel.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified he was a second-class citizen in Egypt because he is a 
Christian. He testified he was forced to retire as a colonel because officers selected to 
be generals are given government positions after retirement, but government positions 
are not given to Christians (AX J; Tr. 75-76). 
 
Applicant worked as an electronics engineer and part-time teaching assistant for 
the American University in Cairo, Egypt from January 1986 to until 1997 (AX G; Tr. 59-
60). His colleagues and supervisors were impressed with his technical skill, dedication, 
integrity, and loyalty (AX K and L).  
 
Applicant began working as a radio engineer for the U.S. Embassy in Cairo, 
Egypt in October 1988, where he had access to sensitive information. He, his wife, and 
their son emigrated from Egypt to Canada in 1993. They applied for U.S. immigration 
visas, which they received in 1995. Applicant continued to work for the embassy and 
American University until 1997, traveling between Canada and his jobs in Cairo. He 
received cash awards for superior performance at the embassy in December 1989 and 
January 1993, and certificates of appreciation for his performance during a visit to the 
embassy by the President of the U.S. in November 1990, visits of the Vice-President of 
the U.S. to the embassy in 1994 and 1996, and visits of the White House staff during 
August 1994 to April 1995 (GX 2 at 4-10).  
 
Applicant returned to the U.S. in 1997, and he has worked for federal contractors 
in the U.S. since his return. He believes he will lose his job if his application for a 
clearance is denied (Tr. 55). 
 
 Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in April 2001, and he obtained a U.S. 
passport in November 2001 (GX 5). He retained his Egyptian passport after becoming a 
U.S. citizen (GX 4), but he did not use it after obtaining a U.S. passport (GX 6 at 1). The 
Egyptian passport expired in February 2002. On June 19, 2008, he surrendered it to his 
facility security officer, who destroyed it (AX M).   
 
Applicant married an Egyptian woman in March 1973. His spouse is a dual 
citizen of Egypt and Canada. She attempted to emigrate from Canada to the U.S. in 
1997, when Applicant returned from Egypt, but was informed she no longer had a visa. 
She remained in Canada and became a Canadian citizen. She moved from Canada to 
the U.S. in August 2004, sponsored by Applicant. She is now a permanent alien 
resident of the U.S. and resides with Applicant. She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship 
(Tr. 67). They have one son, who is a U.S. citizen (Tr. 67). His spouse’s mother and 
brother are citizens of Egypt. Her mother lives in Egypt and her brother lives in Saudi 
Arabia where he works for a construction company. Her brother supports their mother, 
who is not employed and lives alone (Tr. 85). 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased (Tr. 62). He has a brother who became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in March 1993 and resides in the U.S. He has two sisters who 
are citizens and residents of Egypt. Both sisters are married to Egyptian citizens and 
are housewives. They both live in Cairo. One sister is married to a retired artist, and she 
 
4 
 
 
has two children, a son who is a medical doctor and a daughter who is a pharmacist 
and a citizen and resident of England (Tr. 71-72). His other sister is married to a retired 
engineer and has two daughters, one a software engineer and another who is not 
working (Tr. 72). He contacts his sisters one or two times a year by telephone. Neither 
sister nor their spouses are connected to any foreign government and neither sister is 
aware that Applicant is being considered for a security clearance. He has not visited 
either sister in person since 1995 (GX 1 at 19-21; GX 6 at 2; GX 7 at 2). 
 
Applicant receives military retirement pay of about $500 a month from the 
Egyptian government (Tr. 62). He and his family also are entitled to health care benefits 
in Egypt, based on his status as a retired military officer. He is unwilling to renounce his 
Egyptian citizenship because he would forfeit his retirement pay if he did so (Tr. 74-75).  
 
Applicant has rented an apartment in Cairo, Egypt since 1971. He has kept it 
because he has a grandfathered lease that costs him only about $5 per month. He 
estimates it would now cost $400-500 per month for a comparable apartment. He has 
not used it since he moved to the U.S. and became a U.S. citizen, except for a short 
time when he visited Egypt in 2007 in an unsuccessful attempt to arrange a marriage for 
his son (AX J at 4; GX 7 at 1; Tr. 73, 80). 
 
Applicant purchased a home in the U.S. in 1998. The loan is paid off, and the 
house is worth about $140,000 (Tr. 77). He has about $25,000 in his retirement account 
Tr. 78). 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts. Egypt is a republic with a 
strong executive, a legislature with 444 popularly elected members and 10 members 
appointed by the president, and a judicial system based on the continental legal system. 
Under the current president, the courts have demonstrated increasing independence, 
and the principles of due process and judicial review have gained wider acceptance. 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world, with a developing economy and 
one of the largest armed forces in the region. The U.S. and Egypt have a strong and 
friendly relationship based on shared interests in achieving Middle East peace, regional 
security and stability, and strong economic relations. The U.S. has provided Egypt with 
extensive military and economic assistance, and has helped Egypt to modernize its 
armed forces. The two countries regularly engage in combined military exercises, 
including deployments of U.S. forces to Egypt. Although Egypt has suffered a series of 
deadly terrorist attacks, its strong opposition to terrorism and its effective intelligence 
and security services have made Egypt unattractive to terrorist groups. Nevertheless, 
the northern Sinai region is a haven for criminal networks that smuggle weapons and 
funds among Egypt, Gaza, and Israel. Terrorist organizations, including those operating 
in Egypt, target the U.S. for intelligence to exploit and undermine U.S. national security 
interests. Egypt’s human rights record is generally poor because of limitations on 
political activity, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, poor prison conditions, and torture 
and abuse of detainees.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
6 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s spouse is a dual citizen of Egypt and Canada and 
resides with him in the U.S. (¶ 1.a); his brother is a dual citizen of Egypt and the U.S. 
and resides in the U.S. (¶ 1.b); his two sisters are citizens and residents of Egypt (¶ 
1.c); he receives military retirement pay from Egypt based on his service in the Egyptian 
army (¶ 1.d); he owns an apartment in Egypt (1.e); and he traveled to Egypt “in at least 
or after” March 2007 (¶ 1.f). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 
6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
 
7 
 
 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant displayed some antipathy and resentment toward Egypt 
as a result of his forced retirement from the Army and treatment as a second class 
citizen because of his religion. Antipathy toward a foreign government is not dispositive 
under Guideline B, because a person can be vulnerable to foreign influence without 
having any positive or favorable feelings toward the foreign government. See ISCR 
Case No. 99-0424 at 36-37 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001), 2001 DOHA LEXIS 59.  
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). In 
assessing whether there is a “heightened risk,” the issue is whether the risk of foreign 
influence is greater than it would be if the person resided in the U.S. The term “foreign” 
is broader than officially recognized governments and extends to non-U.S. and anti-U.S. 
groups operating in a foreign country. A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003).  
 
The citizenship and residences of Applicant’s mother-in-law and grandchildren 
were not alleged in the SOR. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered: A(a) to assess an applicant=s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant=s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether 
an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a 
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide 
evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3.@ ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). Additionally, the Appeal Board 
has determined that even though crucial security concerns are not alleged in the SOR, 
the Judge may consider those security concerns when they are relevant and factually 
related to a disqualifying condition that was alleged in the SOR. ISCR 05-01820 at 3 n.4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-18860 at 8 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2003) 
and ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003)). I have considered the 
evidence concerning Applicant’s mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and grandchildren for the 
limited purpose of evaluating the totality of his family ties in Egypt, evaluating his 
vulnerability to indirect foreign influence exercised through his spouse and sisters, and 
in my whole person analysis set out below. I conclude AG ¶ 7(a) is raised. 
 
 A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, 
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 
7(b). For the same reasons applicable to AG ¶ 7(a), I conclude AG ¶ 7(b) also is raised. 
 
 A security concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). 
Applicant’s spouse obtained Canadian citizenship after leaving Egypt, and she now 
resides in the U.S. and intends to become a U.S. citizen. Her dual citizenship, based 
solely on her place of birth and parentage, does not raise a significant security concern. 
However, the presence of her mother in Egypt raises a “heightened risk” of indirect 
attempts to influence Applicant through his spouse and her mother. Based on the 
presence of Applicant’s mother-in-law in Egypt, I conclude AG ¶ 7(d) also is raised. 
 
 A security concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or 
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated 
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). Although Applicant’s apartment is now quite valuable, his 
reluctance to surrender it is based on its bargain rental rate, not its resale value or 
sentimental value. Because it is a rental property, it has no resale value to Applicant. He 
has used it only once since he moved to the U.S. On the other hand, his military 
retirement pay is economically important to him. I conclude that his entitlement to 
continued military retirement pay raises AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), (d), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant has infrequent contact with his sisters and their families, 
but has feelings of obligation toward them. He has not rebutted the presumption that he 
has feelings of affection or obligation toward his mother-in-law. Egypt and the U.S. are 
friends and allies, and there is no evidence that Egyptian intelligence services target the 
U.S. Thus, it is unlikely that the Egyptian government would cut off Applicant’s military 
retirement pay to gain information from him. Nevertheless, terrorist and criminal 
elements operating in Egypt pose the threat of placing Applicant in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of his family members and the interests of the U.S. I 
conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to Egypt appears to be minimal, but his sense 
of loyalty or obligation to his family members is not minimal. On the other hand, he has 
longstanding relationships and loyalties to the U.S. He worked for the U.S. Embassy in 
Cairo for almost nine years after his retirement for the Egyptian Army. He was trusted 
and highly regarded by embassy officials. He also worked for almost 11 years at the 
American University in Cairo, a non-governmental organization, but one that projects 
U.S. influence in the area. He has worked for U.S. government contractors continuously 
since 1997. He, his son, and his brother are U.S. citizens, and his spouse intends to 
become a U.S. citizen. He owns a home in the U.S. He allowed his Egyptian passport to 
expire in 2002, and he used his U.S. passport when he visited Egypt in 2007. He 
recently surrendered his expired passport to his facility security officer so that it could be 
destroyed. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c).  
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
Applicant’s contacts with his sisters are infrequent, but he has not rebutted the 
presumption that they are not casual. I conclude AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
 Applicant’s travel to Egypt was solely to assist his son in an unsuccessful attempt 
to marry an Egyptian woman. He used his U.S. passport for this visit. I conclude his visit 
to Egypt in March 2007 has no independent security significance. See ISCR Case No. 
02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant served in the Egyptian Army for 18 years while an 
Egyptian citizen and before becoming a U.S. citizen (¶ 2.a), he desires to retain his 
Egyptian citizenship to remain eligible to receive his military retirement pay (¶ 2.b), and 
he receives military retirement pay from the Egyptian Army (¶ 2.c).  
 
 The concern under this guideline is as follows: “When an individual acts in such a 
way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or 
she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient 
to warrant an adverse security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 
WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an 
applicant is a dual national, but rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a 
foreign country through actions.” ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 15, 1999). 
 
10 
 
 
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may arise from “exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” 
including but not limited to “military service,” “accepting educational, medical, 
retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country” or “using 
foreign citizenship to protect financial or other business interests in another country.” 
AG ¶¶ 10(a)(2), (3) and (4). Applicant’s military service occurred before he became a 
U.S. citizen, and it does not raise a disqualifying condition. However, his acceptance of 
military retirement pay and the medical benefits associated with his status as a retired 
military officer and his unwillingness to cause termination of his retirement pay by 
relinquishing his Egyptian citizenship raise this disqualifying condition, shifting the 
burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” AG ¶ 
11(a). Applicant acquired Egyptian citizenship at birth, but he has continued to exercise 
it by receiving military retirement pay from the Egyptian government. Thus, I conclude 
AG ¶ 11(a) is not established. No other enumerated mitigating conditions are 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult with strong ties to the U.S. and a long 
record of service to the U.S. He does not have the financial resources to retire, and he 
feels that an adverse clearance decision will cost him his current job. He has a modest 
income, and he relies on his military retirement pay to support himself and his family. 
However, Athe consequences to an applicant=s career and the financial well-being of 
 
11 
 
 
himself or his family are not a relevant consideration in an adjudication of an applicant=s 
security eligibility.@ ISCR Case No. 02-09220 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 28, 2004). Applicant 
made it clear at the hearing that he is unwilling to relinquish his military retirement pay. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence, but he has not 
mitigated the security concerns based on his exercise of Egyptian citizenship. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
