1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12695
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 4, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 5, 2006.
On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F and
Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on April 1, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on April 25,
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on June 5, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 6,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and
submitted Exhibits A through G, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr) on June 17, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open
2
until June 13, 2008, to submit additional documents.  She timely submitted a cover
letter, and three additional documents, which have been marked collectively as Exhibit
H, and entered into evidence without objection. The record closed on June 13, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Department Counsel indicated in her opening statement that the Government
was withdrawing the allegations listed under Guideline B (Tr at 17).  Therefore the
allegations that are listed under Guideline B will not be discussed or have any influence
on this decision.
Findings of Fact
In her RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1. a., b., c., d., e., j., and m.
She denied 1. f, g., h., I., k., l., and n. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein
as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 22 years old. She is engaged to be married and she has one child.
She is a high school graduate with some college.
Applicant is employed as a security administrator by a defense contractor, and
she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense
sector.
The SOR lists 14 allegations (1.a. through 1.n.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order
as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,642.
In her RSOR, Applicant admitted that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing,
Applicant testified that the total amount of this debt is still unpaid.
1.b. This overdue debt also to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$3,038. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted that this allegation is correct, and at the
hearing, Applicant testified that, although she is attempting to negotiate a payment plan
to resolve this debt, at this time, the total amount of this debt is still unpaid,
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $62. In
her RSOR, Applicant admitted that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing,
Applicant testified that the total amount of this debt is still unpaid.
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $830.36.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she had made an arrangement with the creditor to
3
settle this debt for a one time payment of $499. However, she never made the payment
and the debt is still outstanding. 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $11,593.
In her RSOR, Applicant admitted that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing,
Applicant testified that the total amount of this debt is still unpaid.
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $226.  At
the hearing, Applicant testified that she had resolved this debt with a payment of $100.
Since she had no evidence of this payment, the record was held open to allow Applicant
to submit proof of payment. Exhibit H includes a letter from this creditor, dated January
15, 2008, which shows that a payment was made of $100 on this account, and there is
now a $0 balance on this debt.
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $391.  In
her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing, Applicant
testified that she was unaware of the basis of this debt, although she has not challenged
or disputed this bill with any credit reporting agency. 
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $176.
Applicant testified that this debt was as a result of a fraud perpetrated on her by another
individual and that she is disputing this debt. Exhibit G is a credit report that includes 19
debts that were disputed by Applicant, including this debt. While some of the debts were
deleted as a result of this dispute, the credit reporting agency shows that this debt was
verified with no change. Therefore this debt is still due and owing a this time. 
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $201. In
her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing, Applicant
testified that she was unaware of the basis of this debt, although she has not challenged
it with any credit reporting agency. 
1.J. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $880. In
her RSOR, Applicant admitted that this allegation is correct. However, at the hearing,
Applicant testified that she has not made any payment on this debt, because she does
not believe she should have received this bill. However, she has done nothing to dispute
this bill with the collection agency or any credit reporting agency. 
1.k. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,358.
In her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct. However, at the hearing,
Applicant testified that she has a debt consolidator who is attempting to negotiate a
settlement of this debt, but at this time the total amount of this debt is still unpaid.  
 
1.l. This overdue debt to Creditor 11 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $74. In
her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing, Applicant
testified that she is current with this creditor. Exhibit H includes an invoice from this
creditor, showing that Applicant made a payment of $100 as of April 23, 2008, but there
is still an amount owing of $172.62.
4
1.m. This overdue debt to Creditor 12 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $86.
In her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing,
Applicant testified that she received this bill as a result of a parking ticket in error since
she has a legitimate placard allowing her to park in a handicapped parking space. When
she contacted the creditor, she was informed that if she sent a copy of a printout
showing she had an active handicap placard the debt would be eliminated. However,
Applicant testified that she has not sent the letter to resolve this debt, because she has
not had any time since November 2007 to resolve this debt.  I find that at this time this
debt is still owed, since Applicant has not taken the time and made the effort to resolve
it.  
1.n. This overdue debt to Creditor 13 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $486.
In her RSOR, Applicant denied that this allegation is correct, and at the hearing,
Applicant testified that she received this bill as a result of identity theft. In Exhibit H,
Applicant submitted a letter that she wrote indicating that she had contacted a
representative from this creditor explaining that an investigation is now being conducted
on this account. 
Applicant testified that her financial difficulties primarily began when she was 19
and 20, and did not act in a financially responsible manner. She testified that she is not
overdue on any of her current debts. She did purchase a vehicle in November 2007 in
the amount of $13,000, and she has been making payments of $397 a month. 
Applicant submitted a confirmation agreement, signed by Applicant on February
5, 2008,  from a consumer crediting agency, attached to her RSOR, that Applicant
testified is attempting to help her resolve her overdue debts. However, no
documentation was submitted, nor did Applicant have any information, as to whether
this company had done anything to resolve any of her debts.  
Finally, Applicant did submit a very positive performance evaluation from her
current employer (Exhibit A) and a certificate of Congratulations for her “outstanding
support” in her current employment (Exhibit E).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
5
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations
is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
6
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Under AG ¶ 19 (a), an Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), a history of not meeting financial obligations
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has
been unable to pay some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
l do not find any of the mitigating conditions is a factor for consideration in this
case. While Applicant seems to be more financially sound and better prepared for future
contingencies, she still has not resolved a great deal of overdue debt. I therefore
conclude that until she is able to significantly reduce her overdue debt, she has not
mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and why no Mitigating Condition
applies, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant  questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
