KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: Although the Judge found some evidence of mitigation, that did not compel the Judge
to reach a favorable security clearance decision.  Applicant’s evidence of good duty performance
was not sufficient to mitigate security concerns arising from unlawful drug use and falsification
of his security clearance application.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-10454.a1
DATE: 08/12/2008
DATE: August 12, 2008
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-10454
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 16, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline
E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 12, 2008,
after the hearing, Administrative Judge Charles D. Ablard denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s failure to find that
Applicant’s conduct is mitigated renders the Judge’s decision arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to
law.  
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact in his decision:  Beginning in 1996,
Applicant used illegal drugs and used prescription drugs illegally.  In 1998, Applicant was arrested
for driving under the influence and possession of a controlled substance.  He plead nolo contendere
and was sentenced to perform community service and one year of probation.  Applicant completed
a pre-trial diversion program on the drug charge, and it was later  dismissed.  Applicant asserts that
when he enlisted in the Army, his recruiter told him that he did not want to hear anything about prior
drug use from Applicant.  Other than his 1998 arrest and diversion, Applicant did not mention his
history of illegal drug use on a security clearance application in 2001 or in his subsequent interview
with an investigator.  Applicant continued to use drugs while he was in the Army and in possession
of a security clearance.  After he received a security clearance in September 2003, Applicant’s use
of illegal drugs included cocaine (at least twice) between June 2005 and March 2006.  Applicant
was discharged from the Army and last used illegal drugs at approximately the same time, in March
2006.  When Applicant went to work for his current employer after his discharge, he was told that
the company did not tolerate illegal drug use during the period of employment and for two years
prior to employment.  Applicant was forthright in revealing his history of drug abuse in completing
a security clearance application in 2007 and in a subsequent security interview.  
The Judge also found that Applicant had a distinguished military career.  He has received
consistently high evaluations and certificates of recognition from his current employer.  Applicant
has moved from the city where he used drugs and no longer associates with the persons he used
drugs with.  He is engaged and has purchased a home.  
Applicant admitted to the allegations against him, and those admissions were sufficient to
establish the government’s case against him.  The burden of proof then shifted to Applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the case against him.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Applicant attempted to
explain his falsification of his 2001 security clearance application.  He presented evidence regarding
his successful military career and a favorable job evaluation from his current employer.
With regard to Applicant’s work record, the federal government need not wait until an
applicant actually mishandles classified material before it can deny or revoke access to such material.
Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative security
implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  In this case,
Applicant admitted to using illegal drugs while in the Army, during a period when he held a security
clearance. 
      
Applicant argues that he presented enough evidence of rehabilitation that the Judge should
have granted him a clearance.  The Judge found some evidence of mitigation.  However, that alone
did not compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23318 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2007).
After reviewing the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 158 (1962).  Accordingly, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
security clearance decision  is sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
