 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16881 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial issues. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On April 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 5, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another Administrative 
Judge on June 16, 2008, and reassigned to me on July 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on July 17, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 13, 2008. 
 
2 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record 
open until August 22, 2008, to submit additional matters. Applicant submitted three 
documents marked AE G though I, and admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on August 21, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2006. He attended college for a period but did 
not obtain a degree. He served in the U.S. Navy on active duty from 1993 to 1994. He 
received an Honorable Discharge for disability. He received severance pay of $3,733 
but elected not to submit a claim for disability as he feels that he is capable of working. 
He is currently married and was married twice previously to other women. His first 
marriage ended in divorce. His second marriage was void because he married his 
second spouse before his divorce was final. He has four children between the ages 15 
and 10. The four children live with their mothers. He pays child support for the two 
oldest children. The mother of the youngest two children has not requested child 
support on their behalf.1  
 
 The SOR lists 31 debts totaling approximately $26,049. Applicant admitted to 
owing all the debts in the SOR with the exception of ¶ 1.ee, which he denied; 1.z, which 
he neither denied nor admitted; ¶¶ 1.l and 1.y, which he stated were the same debts as 
listed in ¶ 1.c; ¶ 1.aa, which he stated was the same debt as listed in ¶ 1.e; and ¶¶ 1.f 
and 1.m, which he admitted to the debts but stated they were being paid by 
garnishment.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to recurrent medical issues, not having 
medical insurance, and not earning enough money. He was unemployed for about three 
months in 2004. His wife is disabled and has been unable to work since about April 
2008.2 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b lists a debt of $263 to a collection company on behalf of a telephone 
services company. Applicant submitted a bill dated April 9, 2008, from another collection 
company showing the balance owed on the account as $382. He stated that the 
company has agreed to accept $105 in settlement of the debt, but he has not paid it 
yet.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 27, 35; GE 1; AE I. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-18, 20-21, 26-27; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 17; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debt of $680 as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for a student 
loan. SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.y are duplicates of this debt.4 
 
 A financial institution obtained a judgment of $5,939 against Applicant in July 
2004. The judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. The judgment is being paid by 
garnishment. The amount garnished varies depending on how much Applicant earns in 
a given pay period. His March 2008 pay statement showed that $44 was garnished for 
the two-week pay period, and $799 year-to-date. He was unable to state how much he 
still owes on the judgment.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m alleges that as of October 26, 2006, Applicant was $8,669 in arrears 
on his child support as enforced by the county. The credit report of October 24, 2006, 
shows this debt as past due in the amount of $8,669, with a balance of $8,997. 
Applicant admitted to this debt but stated it was being paid by garnishment. He 
submitted documentation that his pay is being garnished $189 every two weeks. He 
stated that $328 is taken out for current support and the rest for his arrears. He also 
stated that his income tax refunds have been seized to pay this debt. He submitted 
documentation that $915 was taken out of his income tax refund on June 6, 2008, and 
paid to this debt. He stated that about $3,500 was seized from his income tax refund in 
2006. He submitted documentation from his income tax preparer that he was due a 
refund of $3,572 in 2006. The document indicated a refund anticipation loan check of 
$3,249 would be available from his income tax preparer within one to two days. 
Applicant did not submit documentation that the refund was taken for his back child 
support. He was unable to state how much he still owes for the arrears.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.z alleges a debt of $201. Applicant failed to admit or deny this debt in 
his response to the SOR. Applicant specifically named this debt on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions certified as true on October 3, 2006. It is also listed on the 
credit report of October 24, 2006, but states that it was assigned to a collection agency. 
The debt is not listed on the credit report of February 1, 2008. Applicant testified that he 
was unfamiliar with the creditor but it was likely a medical debt and he was willing to 
admit that he owed it.7 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debt of $296 to a telephone service company, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.aa, but stated it was a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.e, which alleged a debt 
of $149 to a company collecting on behalf of that same telephone service company. 
After reviewing the evidence, I further find that the debt of $371 to a collection company, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x is also a duplicate of this debt.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 18-19, 23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 19-20; Applicant’s response to the SOR; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 14-17; Applicant’s response to the SOR; GE 1-3; AE G, H. 
 
7 Tr. at 24; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 18-19, 23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt of $426 to a financial institution, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.ee. This debt is listed on the credit report of October 24, 2006, but is not listed 
on the credit report of February 1, 2008. Applicant wrote “this one don’t know about.” 
This is the only debt that Applicant totally denied being his responsibility. I find he is not 
accountable for this debt.9 
 
 Applicant has not paid any of the other debts listed in the SOR. He indicated that 
with the garnishments for the judgment and his back child support, he cannot afford to 
pay the other debts. Many of the debts are for medical expenses. Applicant consulted 
with a debt management company in February 2008. He was financially unable to utilize 
their program as shortly thereafter his wife had to stop working. He has not received 
financial counseling.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 24; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
10 Tr. at 25-32. 
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes most of the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable. He attributed his financial problems to recurrent medical issues, not having 
medical insurance, and not earning enough money. He was also unemployed for about 
three months in 2004, and his wife is disabled and has been unable to work since about 
April 2008. These are conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not submit sufficient information for a finding that he has 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. There are not clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. The 
only debts that are being paid are being done involuntarily through garnishment or 
attachment of Applicant’s income tax refunds. That is insufficient to warrant full 
application of AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant is given credit under AG ¶ 20(e) for those debts he 
disputed, as addressed in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service to our country and that he is a disabled veteran. However, his finances have 
been in bad shape for a number of years with no sign of improvement in the foreseeable 
future. They remain a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.w:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.x-1.y:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.z:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.aa:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.bb-1.dd:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.ee:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
