1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-15321
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
 Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 18,
2006. On April 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 29, 2008 and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 
22, 2008. I received the case assignment on May 28, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on June 6, 2008, for a hearing on June 17, 2008. I convened the hearing as
scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered five exhibits (Exhs 1-5) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted four exhibits (Exhs. A-D)
which were admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 1, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep
the record open until July 17, 2008, to submit additional evidence. A set of documents
(Exhs. E-Q) was received three days after the conclusion of the hearing. The
documents were admitted in evidence without objection.
Procedural Rulings
Notice
The hearing notice was dated less than 15 days before the hearing date. I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before
the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated
he was ready to proceed (Tr. 8).
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a government contractor working as an
operations commander of a security service company since August 2005. He
supervises the facility security personnel at a small Navy base. He holds a second job
as a police officer for a municipality. 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the four allegations in the SOR relating to
approximately $139,000 in delinquent debts arising from his purchase of three rental
properties in June 2005. He paid $238,000 for one and $170,000 for each of the other
two for a total of $578,000. He bought each property with a $1,000 investment for each. 
In addition, the seller also paid in a total of $10,000 to facilitate the purchases of
all three properties. The seller did not expect to be re-paid nor did he take a second
mortgage on the properties. Apparently the profit to him came from the mortgage
company that sold the mortgages to another company. This was a practice followed by
other sellers involved in similar schemes (Exh. O, p. 2).
Applicant and seven or more other persons were the victims of a scam
perpetrated by the person who sold the properties to him and the others who were
involved in the operation. The properties were all over-valued by appraisers who were
working with the mortgage company and the seller. The mortgages with inflated values
3
were sold to other companies leaving Applicant and others with mortgages to pay on
properties worth much less than the mortgages for which they were responsible. 
The tenants in the three properties were receiving Section 8 low-income rental
payments from the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) The rents of
$1,500 per month for all three properties were paid to Applicant by HUD (Tr. 31). The
funds were then sent each month to the mortgagor as mortgage payments for six
months until January 2006. At that time the entire complex of which these two lower
priced properties were a part was condemned for heating and health violations. The
result was there was insufficient rental income to pay the mortgages. Applicant stopped
making payments and the properties were foreclosed in 2006. All three were later sold
to be rehabilitated at a much lower price than what Applicant and other purchasers had
paid. It is the difference in the sales price less the mortgage payments made by
Applicant and the remaining amount of the mortgage that constitutes the debts that are
the basis of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.,1.b., and 1.c.).
When Applicant became fully aware of what had happened with the appraisals,
he wrote a letter in April 2006 to the attorney general of the state where the transactions
took place. Copies of the letter were sent to other state officials responsible for
regulating real estate and appraisals urging that action by taken against the perpetrators
of the scheme (Exh. C). No responses were received by Applicant from any of the
officials. At the time of the hearing in this matter, Applicant had obtained very little
information and documentation in the two years since he concluded that he had been a
victim of fraud. The record was held open for 30 days for additional submissions. He
was urged by me to make contact with prosecutors and others involved in related
matters. Most of the material cited herein was provided during that period. 
The person who sold the properties to Applicant was found with a single bullet
wound to the head in 2006. Authorities determined that he either was murdered or
committed suicide. The mortgage company and the appraiser are out of business. One
person, an employee of the mortgage company that initially held Applicant’s mortgage,
has pled guilty to a fraudulent transaction, and been sentenced in federal court. 
The scheme has been the subject of press commentary involving several similar
operations in at least three southern states. Applicant and the other victims, who
describe their involvement in the record (Exhs. G and H), have engaged counsel in their
state (Exh. F) to obtain relief on their credit reports (Exhs. J and K) and take action
against the perpetrators. No definitive results have been forthcoming since the seller,
the mortgage company, and the appraisers involved have either closed their operations
or are deceased. 
Applicant has been in contact with the company that purchased the mortgage
from the original mortgagor in an effort to work out a payment program or settle the
matter. However, the company has insisted on full payment of all three debts (Tr. 14).
4
Applicant is divorced and has a five-year-old son for whom he is responsible. He
served for three years as an enlisted person in the Army between 1993 and 1996. He
also served briefly as an officer in the Army National Guard in 2001 and 2002 (Exh. 1). 
Applicant’s annual salary from his principal employment is approximately
$65,000. For his second job he is paid approximately $18,000 per annum. He is highly
regarded by his employer for his work (Exhs. A and B). He has savings of approximately
$30,000 (Exh. D). He has no other financial difficulties. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
5
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), "a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.” Applicant accumulated the delinquent debts cited in the SOR and
has been unwilling to make payments to the purchaser of his mortgages for several
years since he believed he had been the victim of a fraudulent scheme. Thus, the
evidence clearly raises these potentially disqualifying conditions.
While the initial down payment by Applicant of only $1,000 and the fact that the
seller was willing to pay $10,000 more to facilitate the scheme should have raised red
flags to him, he had no specific reason to believe that the events would turn out as they
have. From information provided about other investors in similar schemes facilitated by
the operators, many others have been taken in by this and similar operations (Exhs O
and P). It is only one piece of the mortgage crisis we now see across the country.
The guideline also includes examples of mitigating conditions (MC) that could
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), the
security concern also may be mitigating where the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant voluntarily
entered into the transaction to purchase the properties to make an investment. There
was no guarantee that rents would continue to be paid under the Section 8 program or
any by any other tenant. When the investment did not develop as planned, he ceased
6
making the payments. When he concluded that he had been defrauded, he wrote a letter
and did very little to follow up on the matter until the hearing in this proceeding. The
mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG ¶ 20(e) the security concern may be mitigated when the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt that is the cause of the
problem, and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
I conclude that Applicant has established the basis and modus operandi of the
fraud committed on him, others similarly situated, and on the purchasers of the inflated
value mortgages. He made payments on the mortgages up to the time the properties
were foreclosed or condemned. One debt has been charged off (SOR ¶ 1.c.). He does
not have the financial ability to pay the full amount of the mortgage deficiencies for which
he has been assessed. Recently, he has taken steps to have the debts removed from his
credit records. He has had discussions with the current holder of the mortgage in an
effort to compromise the amount of the debt or be relieved of it. No results have been
achieved. He continues to be legally responsible for the debts. While I believe there were
fraudulent transactions involved in this scheme, Applicant has not been sufficiently
diligent in pursuing the problem until recently. The mitigating condition is not applicable.
It is premature to grant a security clearance. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case.  
Applicant is a young adult with significant responsibility in his two jobs and for his
family. He is acting responsibly to make certain that he provides for their support. He
7
was offered a real estate package that was too good to be true and it turned out that it
wasn’t. He was completely inexperienced in real estate investment and was taken in by
the scheme in the belief that he could be a property owner with rental income to pay the
mortgages from very little money invested. However, he has taken some steps to resolve
the delinquent debts with the mortgage holder and, hopefully, will continue to do so. 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from these financial
considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is denied. 
_______________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
