                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18080 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
On March 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 21, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on July 11, 2008, and reassigned to me on July 21, 2008. DOHA 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on July 23, 2008, and the case was scheduled at the request 
of Applicant’s counsel for July 31, 2008. Applicant waived the 15-day notice 
requirement. I convened the hearing on the scheduled date.  
 
Rulings on Procedure and Evidence 
 
The government offered fourteen hearing exhibits (HE) and requested I take 
administrative notice of each exhibit. After I reviewed the exhibits I took administrative 
notice of HE I through V. I declined to take administrative notice of the other exhibits as 
they were not official documents from government sources whose accuracy cannot 
reasonably be questioned, but rather were news releases.  
 
I permitted department counsel to submit the documents now marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE). He offered GE 1 and 2 which were admitted without 
objection.  
 
GE 3, originally offered as a hearing exhibit is a memoranda of facts about the 
country of Taiwan. It was admitted without objection.  
 
GE 4 through 12 were originally offered as hearing exhibits. Applicant’s counsel 
objected to GE 4-12 on the grounds of authentication, reliability, materiality and 
relevance. Specifically that they were not reliable, were piece meal and not a complete 
record and they were irrelevant to the issues in subject case, as they did not deal with 
naturalized U.S. citizens, but rather dealt with export violations by U.S. companies. 
Department counsel’s position was that the documents reflected the U.S. concerns 
about industrial espionage and showed the country of Taiwan reflected a heightened 
risk factor to be considered. I did not admit GE 4-8. These exhibits were news releases 
from the U.S. Department of Commerce reflecting snippets of information about U.S. 
companies that had settled allegations that the company had attempted to or had 
illegally exported items to Taiwan, among other countries. Although the rules of 
evidence are relaxed, the administrative judge is still required to ensure evidence 
offered is reliable, relevant and material to the security concerns raised. U.S. companies 
engaging in illegal exports to foreign countries are too far removed from security interest 
alleged in this case. These news releases do not comply with even the low threshold of 
reliability, relevance and materiality. In addition, the medium used to present 
information, that is a news release, barely provides the reader with more than a glimpse 
of the factual issues and does not meet the minimum bar or reliability. GE 9 was also 
not admitted for the same reason above. This news release reflected that two people 
were indicted for violation of export licensing laws. The article says the items were 
destined for Taiwan. No other information was provided. In addition, none of the above 
documents comply with the authentication requirements listed in accordance DoD 
Directive 5220.6 Section 5 (b), specifically they are not “records compiled in the regular 
course of business, or other physical evidence, other than investigative report” that have 
been ”furnished to the Department concerned by an investigative agency pursuant to its 
responsibilities in connection with assisting the head of the Department concerned to 
safeguard classified information within industry.” 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
GE 10 is a copy of an indictment dated October 2005 for an individual alleged to 
have violated U.S. export laws. No information was provided whether this person was 
targeted by a foreign agent or whether the individual was convicted. The indictment 
alone is not enough to raise it to the level of relevance and materiality. The above 
authentication requirement has not been met. 
 
GE 11 and 12 were admitted. GE 11 is a news release from the United States 
Attorney’s Office detailing the final sentencing of a defendant who pleaded guilty for 
unlawful removal of classified material from the Department of State and making false 
statements to the government. GE 12 is a stipulation of fact between the U.S. and the 
defendant in the above case, detailing his offenses and how he was targeted by a 
Taiwanese intelligence officer. I found these documents specifically relevant to the issue 
of an individual being targeted by the Taiwanese government.1  
 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit (AE) A-B, which were admitted without 
objection. Two witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on August 7, 2008 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old woman who is the co-founder/chief executive officer 
and co-owner of her own business. The business has contracts with the Department of 
Defense. Her husband is the co-founder/chief financial officer/managing director and co-
owner. The third co-owner is also a co-founder and president. Applicant was born in 
Taiwan and received her bachelor’s degree while there. She came to the U.S. in 1995 
to pursue a masters in business and completed the degree in 1997. She was married 
when she came to the U.S. but the marriage was failing and her husband did not 
accompany her. She met her future husband, a U.S. citizen, in 1996. He was also 
pursuing a graduate degree at the time. She returned to Taiwan in 1997 and realized 
she had some life changing decisions to make. She decided to get divorced and return 
to the U.S. to pursue a career and permanently settle. In 1998 she and her husband 
married. Both she and her husband earned their certified public accountant certificates. 
She worked in business until two months before her first child was born in March 2001. 
Her second child was born in September 2003 and she remained at home until 2005. 
She has since resumed working in the joint business venture.2 
 
 Applicant returned to Taiwan in September 2001 to introduce her daughter to her 
family residing there. She returns yearly to visit her family, so they will have an 
1 Tr. 17-32. 
 
2 Tr. 33-38, 52-53, 87-89, 105. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
opportunity to know her children. She approximates that she spent between four and six 
weeks visiting her relatives in Taiwan in the years 2001 through 2004. In 2005 and 
2006, she stayed for two weeks because she had resumed work. In 2008, she also 
spent two weeks.3  
 
 In 1998 after Applicant got married she started the process to become a U.S. 
citizen. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen on October 26, 2004. She testified the 
reason it took so long for her to obtain her citizenship is because the immigration 
process was backed up. She eventually hired an immigration lawyer to assist her.4  
 
 In 2006, Applicant traveled to Taiwan. She obtained a visa from Taiwan because 
it was required of all U.S. citizens. During this trip Applicant brought both her new U.S. 
passport and her Taiwanese passport. Both her U.S. and Taiwanese passports were 
stamped. She testified that when she arrived in Taiwan, after an 18-hour flight, with her 
two small children, she and the children were tired and she found it expedited the 
process of getting through the entry process by showing both her Taiwan and U.S. 
passport. She testified that because she spoke Chinese the immigration officer 
assumed she was using her Taiwanese passport. She advised him she was using her 
U.S. passport, and both passports were stamped. After this first trip she has not used 
the Taiwanese passport. She credibly testified that she is willing to renounce any 
citizenship rights she may have with Taiwan. She surrendered her passport to her 
facility security manager and defaced the passport by writing the word “void” on all of its 
pages.5 The facility security manager provided a statement verifying he had her 
passport in his possession and should she request its return he would notify the 
Defense Security Service.6 She did not send it back to Taiwan or formally renounce her 
citizenship because she was advised that by doing so it may heighten Taiwan’s interest 
in her because they may suspect her reason for returning the passport and formally 
renouncing her Taiwanese citizenship is because she is applying for a U.S. security 
clearance. She obtained paperwork from the government of Taiwan to go through the 
renouncement procedures and verified she has no criminal history or delinquent taxes 
in Taiwan.7 Applicant has never attempted to obtain Taiwanese passports or citizenship 
documents for her two children.  
 
 All of Applicant’s financial interests are in the U.S. She has no financial interests 
or potential inheritance interests in Taiwan. She estimates her financial worth, including 
she and her husband’s assets, both business and personal, is approximately $750,000 
to $1 million. Their business employs approximately 25 people, many of whom are 
3 Tr. 38-40. 
 
4 Tr. 40-42. 
 
5 Tr. 42-44, 62-76; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Id.; AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
retired military officers. No Taiwanese nationals are employed by their business. She 
also estimates the company did approximate $1.5 million in revenue in 2007, with a 
profit of about 13%. This year they anticipate revenue of approximately $3.5 million and 
a similar profit. She and her husband own two houses.8  
 
 Applicant’s widowed mother lives in Taiwan. She is 77 years old and raised eight 
children. Her father died when Applicant was nine years old. He was a chef by trade. 
Her mother never worked outside of the home. She was raised on a farm and has no 
connection to the government or military, nor is she involved in politics. She lives in an 
apartment that she has already titled in her son’s name. This same son lives with his 
family in the mother’s home.9  
 
 Two of Applicant’s brothers live in Taiwan. The older is a security guard at a 
factory. Applicant does not know what is manufactured at the factory. Her brother’s wife 
is a housewife. They have one son who works on an assembly line in a factory. 
Applicant is not aware of what is assembled. Applicant’s other brother is married and 
has two children. Her younger brother who lives with their mother works for a business 
that manufactures promotional items for businesses. Neither brother is connected to the 
government, military or has political inclinations10.  
 
 Applicant has five sisters. One lives in Canada and is a contractor doing home 
renovations. Applicant has very little contact with her. One sister is a retired accounting 
supervisor who was in the shoe business. Three years ago she joined her husband and 
they work in a company manufacturing medical devices. They have two children. She 
does not know what her nephew does. Her niece went to school in the U.S. and is now 
living in Singapore. Another sister is retired from a financial institution where she sold 
stocks and bonds. She is now a home maker. This sister is divorced and has a grown 
daughter who works as an accountant for a commercial company. Another sister is a 
homemaker. Her husband owns a small printing company. The last sister is a certified 
insurance salesperson. She is single and lived with Applicant for a few months while in 
the U.S. Applicant is unaware of any specific contacts her relatives may have with the 
Taiwanese or People’s Republic of China businesses.11  
 
 None of Applicant’s siblings are involved in technology or the corporate world. 
When Applicant visits her mother and siblings in Taiwan they do not talk about her 
business, but rather their interests are about typical family and children issues.12 
 
8 Tr. 100-104. 
 
9 Tr. 44-45, 55. 
 
10 Tr. 46-47, 79-82. 
 
11 Tr. 47-50, 82-91, 110. 
 
12 Tr. 50-53. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant has given her mother birthday and holiday gifts in the past, but does 
not provide any financial support to her or any other family member. Her mother is 
aware that she is a partner in a company involving engineering services, but is not privy 
to any other information. She speaks with her mother about once a week or once every 
two weeks. She may speak with one or some of her siblings about once a month, but it 
is irregular as to whom she speaks and how often. Her discussion topics are of a 
personal nature about the family. Applicant’s family is not aware of any specifics about 
her business. Applicant does not maintain contact with any friends in Taiwan. She is 
friends with two couples in the U.S. that are Taiwanese, but are not associated with the 
Taiwanese government or other Taiwanese companies. One couple are naturalized 
U.S. citizens and the other hold “green” cards and are in the process of obtaining their 
U.S. citizenship. Applicant has never been contacted, retained, or arrested by any 
representative of the Taiwanese government.13  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that if she was ever placed in a position of having to 
choose between her family living in Taiwan and her loyalty to the U.S., she strongly and 
adamantly testified that she would never compromise her loyalty to the U.S. She has 
actually discussed this issue with her husband. She credibly testified that her 
conscience would not allow her to betray the U.S. It is not something she would be able 
to live with. Her first priority would be to her children and husband who are American 
citizens and she would not put them or her country at risk.14 
 
 Applicant’s business has two sides, one that contracts with the Department of 
Defense and the other that provides financial consulting services to other companies. 
The two different business interests are not located together. The financial consulting 
side of the business does not deal directly with any Taiwanese contractors. The 
consulting side of the company may have dealings with company clients that may have 
business dealings with Taiwanese companies, but neither Applicant nor her company 
has direct contact with the client company’s clients and none of these companies are 
involved in the defense contract side of their business. Furthermore the relationship with 
these companies is in the area of financial support and accounting services.15 
 
 Applicant’s life is firmly rooted in the U.S. She is registered to vote in the U.S. 
and has not voted in Taiwan since her departure. Her husband’s family lives close and 
they celebrate traditional American holidays together. She has not received any benefits 
from Taiwan, including health benefits.16  
 
13 Tr. 54-55, 91-100.  
 
14 Tr. 71-73, 111-112. 
 
15 Tr. 98, 126-137. 
 
16 Tr. 55-62, 91-92. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s business partner has known her for more than 12 years and their 
families have socialized together. They visit each others homes and have developed a 
high level of trust. He believes Applicant is a loyal American.17 
 
Taiwan and PRC18 
 
 In 1949, Taiwan was populated by refugees fleeing a civil war in China. That 
same year, Communists in mainland China established the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC), and a separate, independent government was established in Taiwan. The PRC 
does not recognize Taiwan, and insists there is only “one China.” 
 
 Taiwan is a multi-part democracy. Through nearly five decades of hard work and 
sound economic management, Taiwan has transformed itself from an underdeveloped, 
agricultural island to an economic power that is a leading producer of high-technology 
goods. On January 1, 1979, the United States formally recognized the PRC as the sole 
legal government of China. The U.S. also announced that it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people on Taiwan. The Taiwan 
Relations Act (TRA) signed into law on April 10, 1979, created the legal authority for the 
conduct of unofficial relations with Taiwan. The American Institute in Taiwan, a private 
nonprofit corporation with offices in Taiwan, is authorized to issue visas, accept 
passport applications, and provide assistance to U.S. citizens in Taiwan. A counterpart 
organization was established by Taiwan. It has multiple offices in the U.S. 
 
 Maintaining strong, unofficial relations with Taiwan is a major U.S. goal. The U.S. 
does not support Taiwan independence, but it does support Taiwan’s membership in 
appropriate international organizations such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
which it joined in 2002, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the 
Asian Development Bank. In addition, the U.S. supports appropriate opportunities for 
Taiwan’s voice to be heard in organizations where its membership is not possible. 
 
 The TRA enshrines the U.S. commitment to help Taiwan maintain its defensive 
capability. The U.S. continues to sell defensive military equipment to Taiwan, in 
accordance with the TRA. President Bush publicly stated in 2001 that the United States 
would do “whatever it takes” to help Taiwan’s defense and approved a substantial sale 
of U.S. weapons to Taiwan, including destroyers, anti-submarine aircraft, and diesel 
submarines. The White House also was more accommodating to visits from Taiwan’s 
officials than previous U.S. administrations, and permitted visits from Taiwan’s president 
in 2001 and 2003, and Taiwan’s vice president and defense minister in 2002. 
 
 Since then, there have been changes in U.S.-Taiwan relations. Taiwan’s new 
president disavowed key concepts long embraced by the opposing party - the “status 
quo” that there is only one China and Taiwan is part of it - and instead has adopted the 
more provocative position that Taiwan already “is an independent, sovereign country,” a 
17 Tr. 123-125. 
 
18 Information in this section is from HE I, II, III, IV, and V.  
 
8 
 
 
“status quo” he promises to maintain. There was also a series of recent corruption 
scandals. 
 
 In response to Taiwan’s political developments, the U.S. administration appears 
to have dialed back its earlier enthusiasm for supporting Taiwan’s initiatives. While still 
pursuing a close relationship with Taiwan, U.S. officials now appear to be balancing 
criticisms of the PRC military buildup opposite Taiwan with periodic cautions and 
warnings to the effect that U.S. support for Taiwan is not unconditional, but has limits.  
 
 The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. The PRC has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners. 
 
 Both the PRC and Taiwan are known to be active collectors of U.S. economic 
intelligence. The PRC also maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
9 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving Foreign Preference arises: “When 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered AG ¶ 10 (a) (“exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport”) and (b) (“action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign 
citizenship by an American citizen”). Applicant held a Taiwanese passport, after 
becoming a U.S. citizen, until she defaced and relinquished it to her facilities security 
manager. She also used both her U.S. and Taiwanese passport during a trip to Taiwan. 
I find (a) applies to the extent that she used her foreign passport, although not 
exclusively, when she entered Taiwan on one occasion. I find (b) applies under the 
same set of facts.  
I have considered all the mitigating conditions applicable to this guideline. 
Specifically I have considered AG ¶ 11 (b) (“the individual has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship”); (c) (“exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of 
foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor”); and (e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.) Applicant has expressed a 
 
10 
 
 
willingness to renounce any citizenship ties she may have with Taiwan. She does not 
consider herself a dual citizen. She completed some aspects of formally renouncing any 
citizenship ties she may have with Taiwan, but was directed to stop the process so as 
not to create a heightened awareness of her application for a security clearance. She 
has written “void” on her Taiwanese passport. Although she used the passport on a trip 
to Taiwan, it was in conjunction with her U.S. passport. She has obtained the 
appropriate visas to enter Taiwan and followed all other requirements for U.S. citizens 
to travel to Taiwan. She has since voided the passport and not used it. I find Applicant 
has mitigated the foreign preference security concerns.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: “Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered them all and especially considered AG ¶ 7 (a) (“contact 
with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other 
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion”); and (b) (“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
creates a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign country 
by providing that information”). Applicant’s mother and siblings are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan, a country known to be an active collector or U.S. economic 
intelligence. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. 
Therefore (a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
AG ¶ 8 describes conditions that may be mitigating. I have considered them all 
and especially considered AG 8 ¶ (a) (“ the nature of the relationships with foreign 
person, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those person in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.”); (b) (“there is no conflict of 
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign 
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflicts of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”); (c) (“contact 
 
11 
 
 
or communication with the foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”)  
I do not find (c) applicable because Applicant’s communicates regularly with her 
mother and visits her and some of her siblings on a semi-regular basis so that her 
children can get to know their extended family.  
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the U.S. since 1998. She 
received her master’s degree from a U.S. university in 1997. She returned to Taiwan the 
same year to contemplate her future. Her decision to move to the U.S. was a thorough 
thought-out process, rather than a default decision. She contemplated its long-term 
ramifications on both her personal and professional life. She chose to leave Taiwan and 
make the U.S. her home. Part of her decision to return was to marry her present 
husband and make a life in the U.S. She is now the mother of two U.S. born children 
and a successful business woman. She and her husband have no assets in Taiwan and 
have substantial business and personal assets in the U.S. Her mother, who lives in 
Taiwan, has never worked outside the home. None of her siblings work for the 
government of Taiwan. Although some work in the manufacturing industry, none of it 
can be characterized as high technology. There is no indication that any of her relatives 
living in Taiwan are aware of the specifics of her business or do they have any 
government contacts. Taiwan collects U.S. intelligence, as does other U.S. allies. It 
does not have a poor human rights record and there is no indication that it uses 
coercion in its intelligence operations. Applicant has considered what she would do if 
she was faced with a choice between her family living in Taiwan and the security of the 
U.S. She has contemplated what it would mean and discussed it with her husband. She 
credibly testified that she could never live with herself if she betrayed the U.S. Faced 
with her maternal bond to her children, her marriage, and the loyalty she has for the 
U.S. versus her familial relationships in Taiwan, she would resolve the conflict in favor 
of the U.S. I find it unlikely that Applicant would ever be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of Taiwan or her relatives and the interests of her 
immediate family and the U.S. I further find there is no conflict of interest, because 
Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that 
she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in the favor of the United States. 
Therefore, I find (a) and (b) are applicable. No other mitigating condition is applicable.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. Her husband and two children were all born in the U.S. She has been in the 
U.S. since 1997. Her life is in the U.S. now. She is the co-founder and co-owner of a 
successful business. She and her husband have substantial assets in the U.S. She has 
none in Taiwan. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties in Taiwan. Taiwan is 
an ally of the United States. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.”19 The distinctions between 
friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with caution. Relationships between 
nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly 
nations can have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view 
as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations 
have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, 
scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of the nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant to assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable government coercion. The 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has 
an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependant upon the 
government or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S.  
 
The PRC has an authoritarian government, a poor human rights record, and has 
a very aggressive espionage program. The U.S. officially supports the “one China” 
policy. However, to treat the PRC and Taiwan the same is to ignore reality. They 
currently function as separate entities. That is not to say that the PRC is irrelevant to 
this case. The PRC conducts intelligence operations in Taiwan. The threat to Taiwan 
from the PRC is real. It is this threat that is the impetus to Taiwan’s defense spending. It 
also provides motivation for Taiwan’s intelligence gathering. The threat from the PRC 
also provides motivation for Taiwan to keep the U.S. as a friend, as it is dependent on 
the U.S. for arms and defense.  
 
Taiwan is a democracy, does not have a poor human rights record, and is 
dependent upon the United States for arms, as well as its defense against the PRC. 
Taiwan is known to conduct intelligence operations again the United States, but there is 
no indication that Taiwan utilizes coercion against its citizens for espionage purposes. 
Many of our allies conduct intelligence gathering against the U.S. Taiwan would be 
risking a great deal by raising the stakes, and attempting to use duress against one of 
19 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
13 
 
 
its citizens in an attempt to coerce a U.S. citizen to commit espionage. Applicant’s 
mother and her siblings are also not good candidates for coercion as they are not 
dependent upon the government of Taiwan. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence and, 
foreign preference. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2 b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
