 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-11103 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On August 31, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 12, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E (Personal 
Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On March 4, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 29, 2008, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on May 7, 2008. Applicant received the 
FORM on May 16, 2008, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On July 22, 
2008, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations under 
Guideline F, Guideline E, and Guideline J. 
  
 Applicant is 40 years old and separated from her husband. She has a 20-year old 
daughter. Since March 2005, she has worked as a Mess Attendant for a federal 
contractor. She worked as a cashier at a retail store from October until March 2005, and 
was unemployed from October 2001 to October 2004. Prior to being unemployed, she 
was a Runner for a private company for almost two years. From January 1997 to 
February 2000, she was unemployed.  (Item 3).  
 
 In August 2006, Applicant filed an e-QIP. In response to Sections 27d., 28a., and 
28b., concerning unpaid judgments, delinquent debts over 180 days in the last 7 years, 
and debts over 90 days delinquent, she responded “No,” and failed to disclose a 
judgment and numerous delinquent debts. (Item 3). 
 
 During an interview in March 2007, in which she reviewed a credit bureau report, 
Applicant stated that some of the debts arose because her husband was incarcerated 
twice over a couple years for alcohol related crimes and was unemployed. She did not 
recognize some of the debts and ignored others because she does not have the money 
to pay them. Since her husband moved out of their home, his income is no longer 
available to pay bills. Her net monthly income is $1,700 and her expenses total that and 
possibly more. (Item 9). 
 
 Applicant admitted that she deliberately supplied incorrect information on the e-
QIP regarding her finances, because she wanted to obtain a security clearance so she 
could maintain her position. (Item 9).   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated September 29, 2006, October 3, 
2007, and January 11, 2008, Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, 
including one judgment, totaling $17,481, which began accruing in 2001.  All of the 
debts remain unpaid or unresolved, except SOR ¶ 1.q for $161.   
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a) “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Based on three CBRs and her statements, Applicant has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing in 2001. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. The guideline 
includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated 
where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
are numerous and have been ongoing since 2001. Hence, this condition does not apply.   
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant stated that her 
husband was incarcerated for periods of time, which reduced the family’s income. She 
was also unemployed for long stretches of time. Both circumstances were beyond her 
control. However, there is no evidence in the record indicating that she responsibly 
managed her finances during those difficult periods, which is necessary for full 
application of this mitigating condition. Thus, AG & 20(b) has limited application.    
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant did not present any evidence that 
 
5 
 
 
she received credit counseling and/or that her financial problems are under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@ According to the record, only one small debt is paid, and all other debts 
remain unpaid or unresolved; hence, AG & 20(d) does not apply. There is no evidence 
indicating that she disputed any of the debts, which is necessary to trigger the 
application of AG & 20(e) that applies when “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue.”  The record does not support the application of AG & 
20(f) “the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.”    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in ¶ 2.a of the SOR that Applicant falsified her answers 
to three questions on the e-QIP, because she failed to disclose specific delinquent 
debts and a judgment. The Government contended that those omissions may raise a 
security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation and explained that she falsified her application 
because she wanted to obtain a security clearance in order to maintain her job. 
Based on the evidence, the Government established said disqualification.  
Applicant did not provide any evidence that would trigger the application of any  
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the Government’s security concern pertaining to criminal 
conduct: 
 
 
6 
 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
Department Counsel argues that Applicant’s intentional falsification of her e-QIP 
constitutes a violation of federal law, specifically, Title 18, United States Code, Section 
1001, and raises a disqualification under AG ¶ 31.  Based on the finding under 
Guideline E that Applicant intentionally falsified the e-QIP, the Government established 
the disqualifying condition set forth in AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.” None of the criminal conduct mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 31 is 
applicable because Applicant failed to sufficiently address or provide mitigating 
evidence that would warrant the application of any of the five conditions.  
 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 40 years old. She has a 
history of being unable to meet her bills. Her husband’s legal and alcohol issues 
apparently have contributed to those problems. At this time, she did not produce any 
evidence that she has attempted to manage her finances. Without proof that she has 
established a plan to resolve her outstanding delinquent debts and a budget to manage 
her finances, similar problems are likely to occur in the future. Although she forthrightly 
admitted that she did not disclose her financial delinquencies to the Government 
because she feared she would lose her employment, there is insufficient information in 
the record to mitigate the personal conduct concern at this time. 
 
 
7 
 
 
  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial issues, personal conduct, 
and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.r and 1.s:  Against Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
