1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------, ------- ------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12243
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has substantial delinquent debt that he cannot afford to repay. His 25-
year criminal history includes burglary, assault, and driving offenses, most recently in
2005, and he remains on probation. Based upon a thorough review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 22,
2006. On February 26, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), that for some unexplained reason was dated
March 16, 2008, to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and J. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 5, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing on April 10, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 14, 2008, and DOHA
assigned the case to me on May 15, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 10, 2008, and Applicant acknowledged
receiving it at least 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 10.) Although his signed receipt
for the SOR that was delivered through his company’s facility security officer was dated
June 13, 2008, he did receive a copy of the notice via electronic mail on June 10, 2008.
I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 25, 2008. Department Counsel offered
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which
was admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open
until July 7, 2008, in order for him to submit additional evidence. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 3, 2008. On July 3, 2008, Applicant submitted two
additional documents to Department Counsel. He did not submit any further evidence,
and Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s submission without objection to its
consideration on July 7, 2008. These documents were marked AE B, and the record
was closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked for three and a half years. Due to heavy drinking for many years and his
separation and divorce from his first wife in the late 1990s, he fell behind on many bills,
despite regular employment as an electrician or tool operator since 1998. He is now
remarried, with no children. (GE 1 at 1-4; AE A at 33; Tr. at 33.) 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs), from July 2006 through May 2008,
show an extensive history of delinquent debts and judgments, the reported number of
which have declined. (GE 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10.) The evidence shows that some of the debts
were repaid, but many appear to have simply dropped off or disappeared because the
later CBRs are from a different company than the earlier ones. In his response to the
SOR, Applicant admitted that he owed those debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and
1.e (formerly 1.j). During the hearing, he testified that he still had not paid any of those
debts. (Tr. at 24-32.) The first three of these involve medical accounts, placed for
collection, in the total amount of $1,163. He testified to minimal, if any, effort to contact
these creditors or resolve the debts. The fourth of these debts is a judgment obtained
against him by a finance company in July 2006, in the amount of $2,746. He purchased
a computer on credit from an individual salesman. When the computer stopped working,
he found out there was no warranty, so he stopped making payments on the loan he
took out to finance its purchase. He did not contest the case in court. (Tr. at 30-32, 50-
52.)
Applicant denied owing the $5,212 medical bill, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, which
remains on his most recent CBR in an amount of $5,266. Applicant denied owing this
3
bill because he does not remember receiving medical treatment during the time the bill
arose. It consistently appears on every record CBR. He called the credit bureau and
orally disputed the bill, which is noted on the latest two CBRs. His dispute has not yet
been resolved. (Tr. at 28-29.) He also denied owing the $4,991 debt alleged in SOR ¶
1.f (formerly 1.k). Although first listed separately in his July 2006 CBR (GE 3 at 8) as
both an ongoing past due debt and a collection account, comparing the CBR listings
shows that this reported debt is to the same creditor and involves the same loan that
was reduced to judgment and alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Accordingly, this is not a separate
debt. 
Applicant’s most recently submitted personal financial statement reflects a net
monthly salary of $2,344, and monthly expenses of $1,848 comprising only rent,
groceries, utilities and car expenses. It further shows $229 in monthly debt payments for
public storage and a 401k loan repayment, leaving a net remainder of $266 to use for all
other living expenses and delinquent debt reduction. It is noted that the monthly utility
estimate submitted with this July 2009 statement is $430 less than was shown on his
statement submitted in January 2008. He further reported assets of $35 in a savings
account, $86 in a checking account, and a car worth $500. Applicant’s wife no longer
works, since she stays home to take care of his mother who lives with them. He said,
without corroborating evidence, that his step-father’s estate is being probated, and he
anticipates inheriting $20-25,000 to use toward debt reduction when that is finalized.
(AE B at 4; GE 6 at 69; Tr. at 44, 46-47.)
Applicant also admitted the truth of all the criminal conduct allegations in SOR ¶¶
2.a through 2.g, except for ¶ 2.b, which he denied. Department Counsel advised that,
although there was a good faith basis for that allegation, he had no evidence to support
it. Accordingly, that allegation was not established. (Tr. at 38.) Applicant’s admissions
are incorporated in the following findings concerning his criminal conduct.
In January 1983, when Applicant was 25 years old, he was arrested and charged
with burglary, theft, and attempted burglary after a friend, with whom he had been
drinking, broke into a store and stole some items while they were together. He reached
a plea agreement resulting in conviction of the latter charge and dismissal of the first
two. He was sentenced to three years probation. (GE 2 at 3; Tr. at 41-42.) On February
9, 1993, at age 35, he was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI)
and reckless endangerment. He was convicted on guilty pleas to negligent driving and
reckless endangerment, resulting in a fine, 30 days in jail (suspended), and probation.
He was also required to complete a three-day alcohol safety course. (Tr. at 41.)
In both April and June of 1995, Applicant was arrested after domestic violence
incidents and charged with assault on his then-live-in girlfriend. The first incident
resulted in his conviction, a suspended sentence to a year in jail, a fine and a required
anger-management course. The latter charge was dismissed when his girlfriend did not
appear to testify. (Tr. at 39-40.) On December 29, 2000, he was arrested for driving with
expired plates and without compulsory insurance. The first charge was dismissed
4
because he had just not had time to change his plates, but he was fined $400 for the
insurance violation. (Tr. at 39.)
On March 17, 2005, after an evening of drinking at a pool tournament, Applicant
was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI.) His blood alcohol
content was measured at .146%, almost twice the legal limit of .08%. He entered into a
deferred prosecution agreement, requiring him to serve five years probation, pay a fine
and restitution, attend an alcohol treatment program and use a DUI ignition interlock for
two years. Upon entering the treatment program, he was diagnosed as alcohol
dependent and prescribed a two-year program, starting with 12 weeks of intensive
outpatient treatment, followed by aftercare at the treatment center and AA meetings. He
successfully completed the court-ordered alcohol treatment program on August 3, 2007,
with a “very good” prognosis from the head counselor of the program. He has remained
abstinent since this DUI arrest, and intends to continue doing so. His probation will
continue until June 2010, until which time he remains subject to the terms of the
deferred prosecution agreement. (AE A at 32-33, 37-38; AE B at 3; Tr. at 35-37, 42-43,
45, 48-50.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
5
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances: “(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
(Tr. at 56.)
Applicant has at least a ten-year history of failing to satisfy legitimate financial
obligations, both large and small. He still has at least five SOR-alleged unresolved
delinquent debts totaling $9,121 that he cannot presently afford to repay. These debts
became delinquent during a period when Applicant was continuously employed, and his
present financial circumstances do not indicate an ability to resolve them in the near
term. His potential for an inheritance remains speculative and uncorroborated.
Substantial security concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
6
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The five
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented roof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose during the last ten years, and a substantial
number and amount remain delinquent at present. His family budget is such that he
does not have the means to repay them, and is likely to incur additional delinquent debt
when winter utility bills increase. Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his
divorce and alcoholism, but the former was more than eight years ago and his situation
has only partially improved since he stopped drinking. Applicant offered no evidence
that he either sought or followed financial counseling, or that he has any comprehensive
plan to address his debt. He has not contacted many of his creditors to arrange
repayments despite statements of intent to do so. He said that he disputes the amount
claimed on his largest medical debt, but showed no evidence that he followed through
with the creditor about that liability. There is insufficient indication in this record that his
financial issues are either under control or likely to improve in the foreseeable future.
This evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e). 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, including: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser
7
offenses;” “(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;” and “(d) individual is
currently on parole or probation.”
Applicant’s criminal record spans 25 years and includes multiple violations
involving theft, assault, and violation of traffic laws. His second DUI/DWI offense
occurred in March 2005, and he will remain on probation under a deferred prosecution
agreement for that offense for almost two more years. Applicant’s admissions and the
Government’s evidence establish substantial criminal conduct security concerns under
these three disqualifying conditions, raising doubt about his judgment and reliability
while also calling into question his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations. 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security
concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant’s last offense was a few months over three years ago, and he has remained
sober since that incident after successfully completing alcohol treatment. This effort is
commendable and establishes a good start toward mitigating security concerns about
his judgment, reliability, and willingness to follow the law that are raised by his long
history of criminal acts. The mitigating effect of this recent good behavior is lessened
somewhat by the fact that he has been on probation throughout this time, and will
remain subject to severe sanctions under his deferred prosecution agreement for almost
two more years. Given the extent and duration of his criminal record, it is premature to
find that sufficient time has passed to predict that recurrence is unlikely, that doubts
about his judgment and reliability are no longer warranted, or that rehabilitation efforts
have been fully successful. As noted in the findings section, there is no evidence that
Applicant committed the offense as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, so that denied allegation is
considered mitigated.
8
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves substantial delinquent debts that he cannot afford to repay, and a
lengthy history of both financial irresponsibility and criminal conduct of various types
and degrees of seriousness. Applicant is a mature, experienced adult who is
accountable for his decisions and conduct. All incidents of security concern arose after
he was 25 years old. 
Applicant’s debts arose over a lengthy period, and persist to date. There is
ongoing potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains
financially overextended. He completed a two-year alcohol treatment program about a
year ago, in connection with his deferred prosecution agreement and probation for his
2005 DUI offense, and has continued to abstain from alcohol to date. This is a
substantial step in the right direction toward rehabilitation, but has so far only occurred
under the ongoing threat of deferred prosecution sanctions and probation. It is
premature to determine that his rehabilitation and behavioral changes are permanent, or
that recurrence of financial irresponsibility or criminal behavior is unlikely.
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his failure to satisfy debts, history of not
meeting financial obligations, and lengthy criminal history. Overall, the record evidence
leaves substantial doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns arising from his financial considerations and criminal conduct. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:            AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                                  For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c:                                   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
