                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15554
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 8, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 13, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 17, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
SOR Response, page 2.1
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant was born and raised in the United States. In 1994, she married a
citizen of the Netherlands. She applied for, and in October 2005 received, Netherlands
citizenship. In her SOR response, she explained why she applied for Netherlands
citizenship:
[T]his was applied for and granted merely as a practical, administrative
solution to Dutch immigration and naturalization laws. It is to prevent me
from being forced having to enter the costly and extensive immigration
process in the Netherlands, every time upon the return of me and my
family to the Netherlands. Since my husband is employed by [the
Netherlands government], and as such is sometimes stationed in different
countries, this holds especially true.
Applicant’s three children are dual citizens of the Netherlands and the United
States. Two of the children were born in the United States and obtained their citizenship
from the Netherlands based on applicant’s husband’s rights as a citizen of the
Netherlands.
Applicant obtained a passport from the Netherlands in 2005. She has used this
passport, instead of her United States passport, to travel from the Netherlands to a third
country and on a trip to the Netherlands from the United States.
In her SOR response, applicant stated she will not renounce her Netherlands
citizenship “solely for the purpose of receiving security clearance.” She will, however,
renounce it if her United States citizenship “comes in danger.” She further stated her
“loyalties lie with United States.”
Applicant and/or her husband file tax returns with the Netherlands. Applicant has
significant assets in the Netherlands, and also has “built a pension in the Netherlands
due to a mandatory contribution to a pension fund while working.”1
A number of applicant’s friends are citizens and employees of the Netherlands
government.
 Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
3
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern relating to the Foreign Influence guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 6 of the AG, and is as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
Paragraph 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.a., “contact with a foreign family member, business or
4
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion” may be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.b.,
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information” may be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.e., “a substantial
business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country . . . which could subject the
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation” may be disqualifying.
Lastly, under Paragraph 7.i., “conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which
may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign
person, group, government, or country” may be disqualifying.
Applicant’s marriage to a citizen and employee of the Netherlands raises obvious
concerns under Paragraphs 7.a. and 7.b. Applicant’s large financial interests in the
Netherlands raises concerns under Paragraph 7.e. And, the time applicant spends in
the Netherlands leaves her vulnerable to exploitation, pressure and coercion, which
raises concerns under Paragraph 7.i.
Paragraph 8 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Under
Paragraph 8.a., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can demonstrate that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.” Under Paragraph 8.b., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
demonstrate “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual*s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” Lastly, under Paragraph 8.c., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
demonstrate that the “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.”
None of the foregoing mitigating conditions is applicable. Applicant*s relationship
with her husband, standing alone, creates a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
Applicant provided insufficient credible evidence that it is unlikely she would be placed
in a position of having to choose between the interests of the Netherlands and the
interests of the United States, or that she is not vulnerable to a conflict of interest.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
The security concern relating to the Foreign Preference guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 9 of the AG, and is as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
5
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
Paragraph 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 10 a.1., exercising any right or privilege of foreign
citizenship after becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a
family member, such as possession of a current foreign passport, may be disqualifying.
Applicant possessed and used a Netherlands passport after becoming a United States
citizen. Accordingly, this disqualifying condition applies. Under Paragraph 10.b., “action
to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen” may be
disqualifying. This disqualifying condition obviously applies. 
Paragraph 11 describes potentially mitigating conditions. I have considered them
and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature woman who
voluntarily applied for and received Netherlands citizenship and a Netherlands passport
after marrying a citizen of the Netherlands. Since then she has used the Netherlands
passport instead of her United States passport to travel overseas on at least two
occasions. Although two of her three children were born in the United States, she and
her husband obtained Netherlands citizenship for them. Because of her husband’s
employment with the Netherlands government, applicant and her family have lived in
the Netherlands, and there is no reason to believe she will not move back to the
Netherlands, perhaps permanently. She has significant assets in the Netherlands,
including pension rights. Applicant’s marriage to a foreign citizen and her other
significant ties to the Netherlands creates a heightened risk of pressure, coercion,
exploitation and duress.
Although I have considered the fact the Netherlands and the United States are
close allies, this fact is not determinative. It is a known fact that friendly nations and
allies have engaged in espionage against the United States.
6
I have carefully reviewed the administrative record, applicant*s submissions, and
the allegations in the SOR. I have weighed the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
Guidelines B and C, and I have evaluated applicant*s conduct in light of the whole
person concept identified at Paragraph E2.2. of Enclosure 2 of the Directive. After doing
so, I conclude that applicant failed to rebut the Government’s case under Guidelines B
and C.
There is nothing in the record that suggests applicant is anything but a loyal
American citizen. Applicant*s allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism are not at issue in these
proceedings. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides that industrial
security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Therefore,
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest I have based this decision, in
whole or in part, on any express or implied concern as to applicant*s allegiance, loyalty,
or patriotism.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
