1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-16267
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Terry L. Elling, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 20, 2006.
On April 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on June 6, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 30, 2008. The Government offered
Exhibits (GE 1-8), which were received without objection. Applicant testified in his own
behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE A-G), which were received without objection. I left
the record open until July 30, 2008, for Applicant to submit additional documentation.
2
He submitted a post hearing submission (31 pages) marked (AE) H. The record closed
on July 30, 2008. DOHA received the transcript on July 9, 2008. Based upon a review of
the record, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e- 1.g, of the SOR. He denied the other allegations in the SOR
because he had no knowledge of them. He provided additional information to support
his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 53-year-old senior employee of a defense contractor. He received
his undergraduate degree in 1968 and his master’s degree in 1977. He has worked for
his current employer since December 2005 (GE 1). Applicant served in the United
States Army from 1968 until 1988 when he retired. He held a top secret clearance
throughout his military and defense contractor career (Tr.39).
After his retirement from the military, Applicant worked for several government
contractors. In 1999, he began working for the Joint Forces Command. He remained in
that position until 2005. He has had a distinguished career.
Applicant married in August 1971 and has two grown children from that marriage.
His wife opened a day school operation related to a church. When Applicant and his
wife moved in 1992, she took over a school operation that was not in the best financial
shape (Tr. 54). In 1993-94, Applicant and his wife decided to expand the day care
program (Tr. 55). In 1996, they designed a building through a contractor and took out
loans for a second operation. The school did not sustain the paying student population
after a few years. In 1999, the school was losing money. Applicant could not get another
loan and he put some of his own money into the school to help pay the expenses. He
paid approximately $100,000 of his own money toward the school business (Tr. 60).
Applicant paid the required federal payroll taxes and the state worker’ compensation
premiums. He had an accounting firm handle the tax filings and payroll administration.
Eventually, Applicant and his wife, filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 1999 (GE 1).
Applicant claimed he filed the petition to protect the property for the builder who filed
claims on the property. 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in the amount of $200,000 in October
1999, to protect his personal assets in conjunction with the business legal action.
Applicant explained he filed the bankruptcy not because he could not pay any debt or
personal loan, but rather to protect him from “some unscrupulous persons who sought
to claim the property that he and his wife had developed for the school business.” The
IRS as a creditor filed an objection to the Chapter 13 plan. The reason for the objection
was based on a tax claim in the amount of $90,490.84 for unpaid pre-petition tax
Applicant received IRS notices about tax liability for tax years 1997, 1998, 1999 and 2000. The IRS held1
personal tax refunds for Applicant until 2004. He estimates the total amount retained by the IRS was
approximately $20,500.
3
liabilities.  Applicant and his wife wanted to pay $500 monthly to the trustee. The IRS1
objected because the plan did not provide for the full payment of the priority tax claims.
The Petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed by the Court in 2001 for failure to
convert to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (GE 7).
In October 2001, Applicant learned that the Chapter 13 bankruptcy was
dismissed (Tr. 66). He believed that the taxes/debts were part of the bankruptcy
petitions. He had made contributions to the plan in the amount of $ 24,650.  Applicant
believes he did not see the trustee’s report until the security clearance investigation
began in 2007. He acknowledged at the hearing that he should have been more diligent
with this matter in 2001. 
In 2005, Applicant received a notice from the IRS concerning taxes that he had
not paid from the school business. He contacted them to clarify the issue. Applicant
retained legal counsel to investigate the matter. He paid $6,750 in legal fees. He
learned that he owed taxes from the 1990's from the school business. At the same time,
the IRS levied Applicant’s accounts, and garnished his wages for a tax levy in the
amount of $1,668.00 per pay period
In 2005, there was a reduction in government contract work.  In September of
2005, Applicant lost his employment. Thus, he could not pay the tax amount in a lump
sum. He completed an offer in compromise form (656) (AE E). Applicant claimed that
IRS called him back and said that the debt was not collectible because he was not
working (Tr. 75). In 2006, Applicant learned that he also owed state taxes on his 2003
personal tax due to a deduction that he had taken for a business loss that turned out not
to be valid (Tr. 73).
In August 2007, the IRS garnished Applicant’s wages (AE E). The amount
garnished is about $43,000 total. As of May 2008, the IRS is still garnishing Applicant’s
wages but he is not sure why or how the payments are applied.
The SOR alleges an unpaid federal tax lien, six unpaid state tax liens and a
bankruptcy in 1999. The total amount of the unpaid debts is approximately $50,000 (GE
7). 
SOR allegation 1.a is for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed on October 12, 1999 and
dismissed in March 2001 for failure to convert to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, per court
order. Applicant claimed he was not aware that the Chapter 13 was dismissed. He then
stated that his attorney notified him in late 2001 that the Chapter 13 was dismissed but
not for a specific reason.
SOR 1.b is a federal tax lien in the amount of $32,641.00. This has been satisfied
and the lien released on June 27, 2008 (AE H).
4
SOR 1.c-1.g are for unpaid state tax liens from 1995 until 1999 (GE 7) for a total
of approximately $10,100. Applicant contacted the state in 2008. He resolved these
state tax liens after the hearing. The state agreed to reduce the amounts owed and did
not require Applicant to pay all the penalties and interest. Total of liens was reduced
from $14,469 to $9,220. He is paying a monthly amount of $786.14 (AE H). 
SOR allegation 1.h is for $7,700 for an unpaid lien for worker’s compensation tax.
Applicant learned about this when the security investigation started in 2008 by viewing
his credit report. He contacted the agency and learned it had been expunged. The lien
has been satisfied (AE H). 
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $8,700 (GE 8). His wife is not working
due to a medical condition (AE G). After monthly expenses and current debt payments,
he has a net remainder of $1,000. Applicant’s credit card debt is current. He has an
established budget. He has savings in his pension account of approximately $305,800.
He lists total assets as $683,600. (GE 8)
Applicant earned three citations while in the military in Vietnam. He received an
Air Medal (AE A).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
5
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has unpaid debt to the IRS in the amount of $32,641 and
five state tax liens from 1999. He could not meet his financial obligations from the
school failure. He filed for bankruptcy in 1999. AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond
one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative
cash flow, high debt-to-income ration, and/or other financial analysis.” The evidence is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
6
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries started in 1995 but continue until the present day.  Because
of his dedicated recent efforts to establish financial responsibility, it is unlikely that the
financial difficulties will recur or that there is any doubt about his current reliability or
good judgment. This potentially mitigating condition applies. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, his
financial problems initially arose from the failed school business. However, he was not
vigilant with the situation concerning his bankruptcy and his taxes. He also had a few
brief periods of unemployment. He acted responsibly in identifying and resolving these
debts very recently. I find this potentially mitigating condition partially applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This applies. Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies
where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received counseling when he filed for
bankruptcy. This is a legitimate means to resolve financial difficulties. In this case many
of the financial problems were caused by the failed school business. He has satisfied
the state liens and has a payment plan for the other debt. I conclude this potentially
mitigating condition partially applies.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant had his wages
garnished for a period of time. He is still attempting to ascertain the reason why the
wages are being garnished. He has been paying the IRS and they have not told him
where the garnished amount is applies. This mitigating condition partially applies in this
case.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
7
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant has served in the military and in the private
defense industry with a top secret security clearance for more than 40 years. He has
never had any misconduct or issues with a security clearance. He served his country
and he helped his wife to operate a school venture.
The venture failed and financial problems arose from that business failure.
Applicant could have been more proactive after the filing and dismissal of the
bankruptcy in 2001.  He has paid the federal tax lien and the state tax liens. He is in
repayment status with the other debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
