 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-10185 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-Qip), on March 1, 2006. On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 14, 2008, which was 
received at DOHA on March 18, 2008. She answered the SOR in writing on March 28, 
2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on April 15, 2008, and I received the case assignment on 
 
2 
 
 
June 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2008, scheduling the 
hearing for July 17, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
received without objection. The government also submitted a Government’s Exhibit List, 
which was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
L, which were received without objection, and she testified on her own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old administrative assistant, who has worked for her 
defense contractor employer since January 2006. She seeks a security clearance in 
conjunction with her current position. She previously held a clearance while employed 
by a government contractor from 1992 to 2000. GE 1, Tr. 17-19.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1983. Beyond high school, she 
attended a business school during the 1986 to 1987 timeframe and was awarded a 
Business Automation Certificate. Tr. 13-17. She has never been married and has two 
sons, ages 11 and 5. GE 1, Tr. 12-13.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included among other things the review of her March 2006 e-QIP, her September 2007 
Signed Response to Interrogatories and Attachments, her May 1998 Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy Report, and her April 2008, December 2007 and March 2006 Credit Bureau 
Reports. GE 1 – 6. 
 
The background investigation revealed that Applicant had filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in November 1997, and was awarded a discharge in May 1998. (SOR ¶ 
1.a.) Response to SOR, GE 3. Applicant stated she was held responsible for significant 
debts accrued from a failed relationship. Tr. 21-24. 
 
Since she was awarded her discharge in May 1998, she has accumulated 20 
debts totaling approximately $58,040. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. – 1.v.) Two of these debts are 
federal tax liens totaling $23,571. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. – 1.d.) She incurred this federal tax 
liability from non-payment of federal income taxes to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for tax years December 1998 through December 2001, December 2003, and December 
2006. AE E, Tr. 28-29. Applicant stated she increased her exemptions to allow her to 
have a larger net income, which she needed to pay her living expenses and also 
cashed in her 401k retirement account incurring penalties. Tr. 28-29. Applicant stated 
she has adjusted her exemptions to the “right amount.” Tr. 30. Applicant established a 
 
3 
 
 
payment plan with the IRS in 2002. Currently, she is making monthly payments of $200 
to the IRS and is up-to-date. AE E – AE I, Tr. 27-33. 
 
In addition to federal tax liens, discussed supra, the SOR alleges she has two 
state tax liens totaling $4,808. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. – 1.f.) Applicant incurred her state tax 
liability the same way as her federal tax liability, i.e. taking too many exemptions to have 
a larger net income, and cashed in her 401k retirement account early. She has since 
adjusted her exemptions to the correct number. She has not paid her state tax liens, but 
intends to do so when able. Tr. 33-35. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g. is a $75 past due car loan payment, which has been paid. In fact, 
Applicant paid off the entire car loan in May 2008. AE J, AE K, Tr. 35-36. SOR ¶ 1.q. is 
a $1,859 debt owed to her state for an overpayment of unemployment benefits. She has 
contacted her state agency and negotiated an agreement make $50 monthly payments, 
but has been unable to make any payments. Tr. 46-47. 
 
The remaining SOR allegations consist of 14 debts totaling approximately 
$23,727. These debts include a combination of collection accounts, charged off 
accounts, and a past due account. (SOR ¶¶ 1.h. – 1.p., 1.r. – 1.v.) Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies began in 2001 and continues through today. GE 4 – GE 6. Applicant’s 
plan to resolve these debts is to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which has yet to be filed. 
She entered into a Bankruptcy Engagement Agreement with a law firm on September 
11, 2007. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) At the time of hearing, Applicant had paid $850 towards a 
$1,700 retainer fee. The law firm requires full fee payment before they will file 
Applicant’s bankruptcy petition. GE AE A – AE D, Tr. 24-26.  
 
Apart from her debt to the IRS and late car payment (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. – 1.d., 1.g.), all 
remaining debts alleged remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant’s net monthly take 
home pay is approximately $2,790. Tr. 52-53. Her boyfriend and father of her children 
lives with her and pays $260 monthly rent. He also owns a car, which the household 
uses for transportation. Tr. 54, 65. 
 
Applicant has sought financial counseling on two occasions. The first was a one-
time session offered through a previous employer in the 2000 – 2001 timeframe. The 
second was a series of seminars offered by her present employer. Applicant also must 
complete financial counseling in conjunction with her planned Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, 
which has yet to occur. Tr. 54-55. Applicant’s 11-year-old son suffers from asthma and 
allergies. Her five-year-old son is in good health. Tr. 64-65. Applicant describes her 
current situation as “living from paycheck to paycheck.” Tr. 68. 
 
Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to three separate periods of 
unemployment, i.e. January 2000 through March 2000, November 2001 through March 
2002, and December 2005 through January 2006 or underemployment while employed. 
GE 1, Tr. 36-38.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did not submit any employee performance evaluations, reference 
letters or character evidence. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern is that 
an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations dating back to 
1997, when she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Since being awarded a discharge in 
1998, she has accumulated 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $58,040.  
 
Applicant is making monthly payments to the IRS and has satisfied one small 
debt of $75 for a late car payment. Accordingly, she has addressed three of the 20 
debts alleged in the SOR. The remaining 17 debts remain unpaid or unresolved. 
Applicant hopes to include the majority of her debt in a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy yet to be 
filed. For these 17 debts, her financial recovery plan is prospective in nature. Her 
financial difficulties remain ongoing. Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition 
(FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history 
of not meeting financial obligations; apply in this case.  
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude that Applicant is able to 
receive partial credit under Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC ¶ 
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; for her three periods of unemployment. I also gave Applicant 
partial credit for receiving credit counseling under FC 20(c) the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control. 
 
However, whatever credit she received by those MCs is overcome by years of 
financial mismanagement going back at least 11 years. Applicant presented minimal or 
no evidence documenting efforts taken to contact or resolve debts with her unpaid 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
6 
 
 
creditors. Nor does the evidence support the notion that her past participation in 
financial counseling netted any tangible results.  
 
Accordingly, I specifically considered FC MC ¶ 20(b): and FC MC ¶ 20(c), and 
concluded they do not apply given the facts of this case. Applicant’s uncorroborated 
testimony fails to establish mitigating factors that may be considered as circumstances 
beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her debts.  
 
She presented no evidence to show she has dealt responsibly with her financial 
obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, credible payment plans). Applicant’s financial history and lack 
of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she has established a track record of 
financial responsibility, or that she has taken control of her financial situation. Based on 
her past performance, her prospective assurances ring hollow. Her financial problems 
are likely to be a concern in the future. Moreover, her financial problems are recent, not 
isolated, and ongoing.  
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial difficulties.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c. – 1.d.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e. – 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h. – 1.v.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
