1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 07-17850
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on August 21,
2006. On January 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on February 15, 2008. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on April 9, 2008, and the hearing was held on June 13, 2008. At the
hearing, four exhibits (GE 1 through 4) were admitted in evidence without objection to
support the government’s case. Applicant’s 12 exhibits (AE A through AE L) were
 However, GE 1 (security clearance application (SCA)) indicates he was married in 1997, and separated in1
2005.
2
received in evidence without objection. He also testified. DOHA received the transcript
on June 23, 2008.
Findings of Fact
The SOR identifies three federal tax liens and two state tax liens. The federal
liens total approximately $24,000.00 and the state liens amount to about $2,500.00 The
liens were filed after Applicant failed to pay taxes for certain tax years identified in AE E.
Applicant admitted the five allegations under the financial considerations guideline of the
SOR. Applicant is 45 years old and single. He has been working for his current
employer since August 2005. He is employed as a K-9 assistant. He did not recall being
unemployed during is working career. 
Applicant received his Bachelor’s degree from college in 1987. He was a
policeman for several years, then a car salesman in State X. Applicant testified he was
divorced in 1997 (Tr. 23),  and ordered to pay child support. Though the record is not1
clear about the date of the divorce and when his wife relocated, at some point after the
divorce, his wife moved with the children to the local area in State Y. 
Applicant moved from State X to the local area in 2005 to be closer to his three
children. He worked for one company for about a year and a half, before hiring on with
his current employer in August 2005. 
Between 1999 and 2004, Applicant was contributing to the support of his
daughter’s educational costs for college. According to Applicant, low paying jobs and
not having enough money were reasons he could not pay his taxes. To receive more
money in his paycheck, Applicant claimed five exemptions although he had only three
children. He made the decision to claim more exemptions after his coworkers told him
this would increase his take home pay. Even before the liens were filed against him,
Applicant recalled receiving notices from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the
counterpart agency in State X requesting him to pay the delinquent taxes. Applicant’s
W-2 earning form for 2007 shows that he claimed one federal exemption (himself) and
three state exemptions. (AE C) When asked why he declared three exemptions in his
W-2 form for the state, he stated:
Initially, it was just like for the federal. I was claiming high exemptions
because I could get more money back. For the State of [Y], the years that
I’ve been here, I’ve always got a return with three exemptions and I just
hadn’t changed it. (Tr. 83)
In 2003, Applicant collaborated with an accountant to prepare his taxes for that
year. The first time he sought help for his federal and state tax problems occurred in
October 2007. He paid a tax relief organization more than $2000.00 in late 2007 and
3
early 2008 to arrange a settlement with the IRS. However, the terms of the settlement
are not in the record. AE E is the first page of correspondence from the IRS dated
February 13, 2008. Subsequent pages of the letter appear to be missing. The first page
indicates that the first $500.00 payment to the IRS was to be made on March 28, 2008,
with $500.00 payments monthly thereafter until the lien was paid. Applicant has
documented proof of five payments to the IRS, and is confident he will have the federal
debt paid in the spring of 2009. He claims he has paid $16,000.00 toward the resolution
of the liens. No documentation was presented in support of his claim. The
documentation in the record shows Applicant paid about $2,000.00 to the tax relief
organization, $2,500.00 to the IRS in first five months of 2008, and $3,200.00 to the IRS
in the form of a refund for 2007 that was impounded by the IRS. Applicant still owes
State X about $2,500.00, and has a tax preparer assisting him with the state taxes, but
supplied no documentation of an agreement to repay State X. (AE C) GE 3 reflects
Applicant resolved a state tax lien of $613.00 in March 2007. 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning his job performance. Other than the
evidence about his former marriage (which ended in divorce) and his child support, the
only evidence he presented about his lifestyle is the Selective Service information, and
the criminal form showing that a misdemeanor case was dismissed because he had
completed the requirements imposed during the pre-trial phase of his case in 2003.
About three months ago, he began a part-time job as a doorman at a restaurant earning
about $250.00 every two weeks. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.” 
The SOR identifies five federal and state tax liens filed against Applicant between
2001 and July 2007. Applicant stopped paying his taxes from the late 1990s to about
2005, when he moved to the local area. As a result, more than $26,000.00 in federal
and state tax liens have been filed against him. The government has established its
case under the financial FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts),  FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and FC
DC 19.f. (failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required or
the fraudulent filing of same). The good judgment Applicant exercised in at least filing
his tax returns is subverted by the intentionally dishonest conduct in claiming five
exemptions so he could bring home a larger paycheck during the year, and still not pay
his taxes at the end of the year. Applicant knew that misrepresenting his exemptions
was wrong. He also knew he should have paid his taxes.
There are five mitigating conditions (MC) that are potentially applicable to the
circumstances. They are: FC MC 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
5
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);
FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond
the person’s control, and the individual acted reasonably under the circumstances); FC
MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is resolved or under control); FC MC 20.d.
(the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts);
and, FC MC 20.e. (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause or of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue). FC MC 20.a. does not apply. Had Applicant’s dishonest conduct ended in 2005,
then his favorable evidence of payments since October 2007 (to the tax negotiator and
the IRS) to eliminate the tax liens may have been sufficient to overcome his failure to
pay taxes for the lengthy period of time set forth in the SOR. However, Applicant is still
claiming an incorrect number of exemptions in State Y, a different state. Though the
incorrect number of exemptions could have occurred unintentionally or by oversight,
that is not the most reasonable explanation given Applicant’s record for not declaring
proper exemptions in the past, and, in not paying his taxes. Someone had to inform the
tax authority in State Y of the number exemptions to initially declare. 
Applicant gains no benefit from FC MC 20.b. as low paying jobs do not mitigate
the failure to pay taxes. Providing financial assistance to his daughter so she could
obtain her college degree was a commendable act by Applicant. But, his assistance
does not excuse his failure to pay taxes. Applicant has presented no evidence to
suggest that his federal and state tax problems resulted from unforeseen events. 
Applicant receives limited mitigation under FC MC 20.c. and FC MC 20.d.
Though he has had no counseling, he has a five-month record of paying off the federal
tax lien. He also paid the state tax lien in March 2007. The evidence of payment is
insufficient to meet Applicant’s ultimate burden of persuasion under the FC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
The AG indicates the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and whole person concept. The WPC is made of nine
general policy factors:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
the participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and, (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
At the age of 35 or 36, Applicant decided to inflate his exemptions and not pay
his taxes for a significant period of time. This course of conduct was not isolated.
Rather, it occurred from the late 1990s to about 2005. The record shows that even after
he moved to the local area in State Y, he continued to inflate his state exemptions as
substantiated by his W-2 form for 2007. (AE C) While Applicant is congratulated for
finally hiring a tax relief agency to negotiate a repayment plan with the IRS, and then
developing a short track record of payment, he is still engaged in a practice that resulted
in owing the IRS and State X tax agency more than $26,000.00. The false state
exemptions, which were the primary reason for Applicant’s previous inability to pay his
taxes, raise ongoing credibility issues in Applicant’s overall case in mitigation. These
credibility issues cannot be overlooked or excused. Accordingly, the FC guideline is
found against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
