                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-14023
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On January 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 5, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on April
29, 2008.  A hearing was held on April 29, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether
it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or
revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of
two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit.  The transcript
2
(R.T.) was received on May 7, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is denied.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant is alleged to have (a) used marijuana on at least 50
occasions from 2000 to at least March 2007 and (b) purchased marijuana on at least 45
occasions from January 2000 to at least March 2007.  For his answer to the SOR,
Applicant admitted each of the allegations without explanation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old consultant for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant is unmarried and has no children.  He was introduced to marijuana in
social settings in January 2000.  Before January 2000, he had never before used
marijuana or any illegal substances, never in high school and never in college (R.T.,at
34-35).  Between January 2000 and March 2007, Applicant used marijuana occasionally
with friends in social settings. He estimates to have smoked the substance
approximately 50 times between January 2000 and March 2007.  He had no established
pattern of use. 
 For the most part, Applicant used marijuana when offered by a friend in a social
setting.  While he would customarily get together with friends once or twice a week, he
had no time table on when they would decide to use marijuana (R.T., at 37-38).  Albeit,
he occasionally used it when he was alone (R.T., at 38).  Most of his use was with in
cigarette form, but occasionally he would use a pipe (R.T., at 38-39).  Because he did
not own a pipe himself, he borrowed one from others when he wished to use one.
Sometimes, he used rolling paper for his marijuana use (R.T., at 39).  Currently, he has
neither a pipe nor rolling paper in his possession (R.T., at 39). 
Applicant has no clear explanation for why he used marijuana: It was just a social
thing he liked doing.  He assures he never used marijuana at work (R.T., at 40) or  while
driving (see ex. 2; R.T., at 54).   He assures, too, that he never became addicted to the
substance (R.T.,at 29).  Without any probative evidence to discredit these assurances,
they are entitled to acceptance. 
Applicant last underwent work-related drug screening for illegal drugs in 1990
(R.T., at 40).  While in the Air Force (AF) (1988-1990), Applicant never held a clearance
and never used marijuana.  At all times relevant, he was aware of AF policy against the
use of illegal drugs (R.T., at 42). 
3
Applicant purchased marijuana approximately 45 times between January 2000
and March 2007, all for his personal use, and not for resale.  He obtained his marijuana
from friends, mostly in coffee houses.  Typically, his purchases involved 1/8 of an ounce
of the substance for $50.00.  Sometimes, he would buy 1/4 of an ounce of the
substance for $120.00 (R.T., at 46-47).  He assures he never sold or received anything
else from his sources besides marijuana (R.T., at 52).
Applicant ceased using marijuana in March 2007 (possibly as early as January
2007 according to his testimony) and has none of the substance left in his custody and
control (R.T.,a t 45-48).  He does not think it is wrong to use marijuana and believes its
use should be legalized like other intoxicating substances (R.T., at 48-49).  Still, he is
aware that marijuana use is against the law and acknowledges breaking the law when
using the substance.  
Applicant has no intention of using marijuana in the future.  Since March 2007,
he has avoided parties where marijuana is used (R.T., at 50).  He has never been
counseled for drug use, and has never used any illegal drugs other than marijuana
(R.T., at 52-53).  
Applicant‘s facility clearance officer (FSO) is impressed with Applicant’s technical
skills and honesty (R.T., at 57-58).  She is aware of Applicant’s past marijuana use.
She sees him weekly and notes that he has been free of drugs for over a year (R.T., at
58-60); although, she has had little socialization with him on off-duty hours (R.T., at 60-
61).  Applicant’s direct supervisor (an owner of the company) is considers Applicant to
be honest and trustworthy (see ex. A; R.T., at 63-66).  He sees Applicant daily and is
familiar with his past use of marijuana (R.T., at 67-69).  When he hired Applicant in April
2007 he did not discuss drugs with him.  Not until he sponsored Applicant for a security
clearance did he discuss illegal drugs with him,
Applicant’s other references characterize him as honest and trustworthy (see ex.
A).  Coworkers who have worked closely with Applicant find him professional and
conscientious in his handling of his assigned programs (ex. A).
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
4
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: “Improper or illegal involvement with drugs raises questions
regarding an individual’s willingness or ability to protect classified information.  Drug
abuse or dependence may impair social or occupational functioning, increasing the risk
of an unauthorized disclosure of classified information.”  See Adjudicative Guidelines,
¶24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing on the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious defense consultant with a considerable history of
marijuana involvement over a seven-year period. His use and purchases of the
substance over a seven-year period spanning January 2000 through March 2007 is
security-significant.
By his own acknowledgments, Applicant began using marijuana as a mature adult
when offered the substance in social situations.  While he views marijuana as no more
5
harmful than alcoholic beverages, he admits to being aware of its illegality while in the
AF, and later as a civilian.  Between 2000 and 2007, he used marijuana at least 50 times
in social settings and purchased the substance on almost as many occasions (at least 45
times). 
Applicant's extended use and purchase of marijuana is sufficient to invoke two of
the disqualifying conditions of the Adjudicative Guidelines for drugs, i.e., DC 25(a) (any
drug abuse) and DC 25©) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia). 
Applicant has not used or purchased marijuana since March 2007 and assures he
will not use the substance in the future.  Based on Applicant’s considerable history of
marijuana involvement, it is still too soon to enable him to claim the benefits of any of the
mitigating conditions of the guideline for drug involvement.  Both his substantial
involvement with marijuana and the relative recency of his involvement preclude him
from taking advantage of MC 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” of the
Guidelines.  His accepted year of abstinence and expressed intentions to avoid places in
the future where marijuana is used are very encouraging but still untested, and in need
of additional seasoning to absorb all reasonable  risks of recurrence.  At this time, it is
still too soon to warrant application of any of the remaining mitigation conditions. 
From a whole person perspective, Applicant presents as an essentially honest
and hardworking professional consultant who used and purchased marijuana he knew
violated  the civilian laws of his state.  The positive impressions he has made on his
civilian employer must be balanced against the risks he poses to recurrent to marijuana
use based on his past involvement with the substance.  Neither his coworkers or
supervisors who know him pretty well socialize with him enough after hours to be able to
make safe predictions themselves about his risks of recurrence.  With only a year of
abstinence to his credit and no counseling to guide him in the future, his positive work-
related contributions are enough at this time to surmount risks of his returning to
marijuana use in the foreseeable future. 
Considering all of the developed evidence of record, Applicant fails to mitigate
security concerns associated with his recurrent use and possession of illegal
substances.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to sub-paragraphs 1.a and
1.b of Guideline H. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached
in the context of the FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS, CONDITIONS, and the
factors listed above, I make the following FORMAL FINDINGS:
GUIDELINE H (DRUGS): AGAINST APPLICANT
6
Sub-paras. 1.a - 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
 
 
