                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12916
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 20, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), dated January
15, 2007.  On March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the
Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 17, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing on April 7, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on June 6, 2008.  A notice
of hearing was issued on June 16, 2008, and the matter was scheduled for hearing on
July 8, 2008.  The Government called one witness and presented five exhibits, referred
to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. The
Applicant presented three exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C,
which were received without objection. The Applicant also testified on his own behalf.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 18, 2008.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 43 years old, married, and did not graduate from high school,
but has completed some college courses.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a
Warehouse Specialist, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
The Applicant was arrested, charged and convicted on twelve separate
occasions, beginning in 1983 and continuing until at least September 2000, for various
criminal violations, nine of which were drug related offenses.  He attributes his high risk
lifestyle to the fact that he grew up a troubled youth in a rough, poverty stricken
neighborhood where drugs and criminal conduct ran rampant.  He was in and out of
foster care and eventually ended up living on the streets.    
 
In May 1983, he was arrested and charged with Simple Battery.  The Applicant
got into a fight with a known criminal who hit him with a stick.  The Applicant hit him
back, while the police were watching the incident.  At court, the case was dismissed.  In
January 1985, he was arrested for Burglary.  This case was also dismissed.  In January
1988, on the Applicant’s birthday, he was arrested and charged with Possession of a
Controlled Substance (Cocaine).  This charge was later dismissed.  Three days later, in
January 1988, the Applicant was arrested for Possession of a Controlled Substance,
Unlawful Use of a Weapon and Failure to Register a Firearm.  In June 1988, he was
arrested and charged with Possession of Cocaine.  In July 1988, he was arrested again
and charged with Possession of a Controlled Substance.  In February 1990, he was
arrested and charged with Carrying a Concealed Weapon.  He pled guilty and was
sentenced to one year of supervised probation.  In August 1990, he was arrested and
charged with Possession of a Controlled Substance with Intent to Deliver.  In October
1990, he was arrested and charged with Possession of a Controlled Substance.
(Government Exhibit 3)   
In July 1991, he was charged with Unlawful Use of a Weapon, Failure to Register
a Weapon, and Possession of a Controlled Substance.  The Applicant pled guilty and
was sentenced to 14 days in jail and one year of probation.  (Government Exhibit 3).
In April 1992, he was charged with Possession of Heroin.  The charge was later
dismissed.  (Government Exhibit 3).
In September 2000, he was arrested and charged with Possession of a
Controlled Substance (Marijuana/Cocaine).  The Applicant explained that he was off
work and was sitting in his car “getting high”.  He was smoking a marijuana cigarette
laced with cocaine when the police pulled up and caught him in the act.  He was later
enrolled in a diversion program for drug abuse and education which he completed in
July 2001.  (Government Exhibit 3).      
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant used a variety of illegal drugs beginning in 1979 at the age of
fourteen or fifteen, that continued until at least October 2000, at the age thirty-five.
 
In 1979, while in high school, he started using marijuana and used it on almost a
daily basis.  As time passed and as he got older, he often smoked marijuana cigarettes
that were laced with cocaine or PCP.  He usually smoked it when he got together with
friends.  He also snorted heroin and cocaine.  Although some of his illegal drugs were
provided by friends, he also purchased them with money he earned from odd jobs,
spending between $30.00 and $40.00 a week on the drugs.  He has not used heroin or
cocaine since 1990.  
During his childhood, he described his home life as “messed up”.  His mother
was an alcoholic, his father was not around.  He was one of seven children in his family
and was placed into a foster home at ten years of age.  When he returned home, they
lived among rats and poverty.  He and his siblings missed lots of school because they
had no clothes or shoes to wear.  He found himself rebelling against everything and his
way of rebelling was to use drugs.  
After his arrest in 2000, in an attempt to straighten out his life and stop using
illegal drugs, the Applicant moved his family out of state and across the country.  He
has not used any illegal drug since he got out of jail following his arrest in September
2000.  In July 2001, he completed the court ordered drug diversion program.  (See
Applicant’s Exhibit B).  He indicates that he found the diversion program to be very
helpful.  His wife has also helped him to stay drug free by keeping track of him and
making sure that he is staying on the straight and narrow.  He no longer associates with
drug users and only surrounds himself with positive people.  His main focus is to take
care of his family.  He also coaches basketball for the local park and recreation center
and attends church.      
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
his personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application dated January 15,
2007.  Question 23(a) of the application asked the Applicant if he has ever been
charged with or convicted of a felony?  The  Applicant answered, “No”.  (See
Government Exhibit 1).  The record is not clear as to whether any of the charges set
forth under paragraph 1 above are felonies.  Accordingly, this allegation is found for the
Applicant.          
  
Question 23(b) of the same questionnaire asked the Applicant if he has ever
been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosives offense?  The Applicant
answered, “No”.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  This was a false answer.  The Applicant
failed to list his firearms charges set forth above under paragraph 1.   
4
Question 23(c) of the same questionnaire asked the Applicant if he has ever
been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs?  The
Applicant answered, “No”.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  This was a false answer.  The
Applicant failed to list his drug-related charges set forth above under paragraph 1.  
Question 24(a) of the same questionnaire asked the Applicant if since the age of
16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, he illegally used any controlled
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium,
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc), amphetamines, depressants barbiturates,
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc), hallucinogens, (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription
drugs?”, The Applicant answered, “No”.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  This was a false
answer.  He failed to disclose his illegal use of drugs in September 2000, when he was
arrested for possession of marijuana and cocaine.  
The Applicant offered a number of excuses as to why he did not answer the
questions truthfully.  He explained that he thought that the questions only asked him for
matters that may have occurred within the last seven years.  (Tr. p. 60).  He stated that
he conducted a criminal record search and did not come up with anything so he did not
reveal his past. He indicated that he did not have specific dates and that is why he did
not disclose his arrests.  (Tr. p. 64).  He stated that he knew that he was going to have
an interview with an investigator and that he would reveal the truth then.  (Tr. p. 65).
With regard to question 23(c), concerning whether he had ever used any illegal drugs,
he acknowledges that he should have answered, “YES”.  He does not know why he did
not answer the question truthfully.  (Tr. p. 61)
Based upon the evidence presented, I find that the Applicant deliberately falsified
his Security Clearance Application dated January 15, 2007.  The Applicant’s deliberate
falsifications in his security clearance application, are violations of Title 18 of the United
States Code, Section 1001, a felony.
 
Paragraph 4 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant was indebted to a County for delinquent child support in the
amount of $17,044.79.  As of January 15, 2007, this debt had not been paid.  The
Applicant settled this agreement with the County Child Support Services Department
and entered into an agreement with the mother of his child to pay her $450.00 monthly
which he has been doing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s coworkers and friends attest to
the fact that the Applicant is a valuable asset to the company.  He is considered to be a
hard working, enthusiastic, honest, responsible and trustworthy.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C).
5
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
6
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a)  Deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19.(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(d)  the person initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
7
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct, drug abuse, dishonesty and financial
problems that demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
8
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J), drug involvement (Guideline
H), dishonesty (Guideline E), and financial irresponsibility (Guideline F).  The totality of
this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of
the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines J and E of the SOR.
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, disqualifying conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  The Applicant has a twenty year history of criminal conduct that
includes twelve arrests.  Although his most recent arrest occurred in 2000, almost eight
years ago, he has recently lied a number of times in response to different questions
about his criminal record on his Security Clearance Application.  By doing so, he
committed violations of Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001.  This will be
discussed further under Guideline E, below.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, disqualifying conditions, 25.(a) any drug
abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 22.(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  However, mitigating condition
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment also applies.  Applicant’s last use of
any illegal drug, be it marijuana, PCP, heroin or cocaine, last occurred in 2000, eight
years ago.  His last use of illegal drugs occurred far in the distant past and there is no
evidence in the record to indicate otherwise.  He has made drastic changes in his life to
improve it and I do not find his past use of illegal drugs to be recent or of security
significance.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
   
Applicant’s conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct is very troubling.  He
has not been honest with the Government in answering questions about his arrest
history and his most recent illegal drug involvement.  He deliberately tried to conceal the
truth.  So much inconsistency confirms to the Government that the Applicant’s credibility
is a security concern.  There is no reasonable excuse as to why he did not tell the truth
about his criminal history, other than the fact that he wanted to minimize it.  It is obvious
that he intentionally concealed this information from the Government, hoping to
minimize the seriousness of the matter.  Consequently, his dishonesty with the
Government concerning this matter is unacceptable.  
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, disqualifying condition 16(a), deliberate
omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
9
responsibilities applies.  The Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty
of clearance holders.  It is a negative factor for security clearance purposes when an
Applicant has deliberately provided false information about material aspects of his
personal background.  None of the mitigating factors set forth in the Directive under
Guidelines E or J apply. 
The evidence shows that the Applicant fell behind on his child support payments
but that he has settled the matter with the County Child Support Services Department
and he has negotiated with the mother of his child to pay her $450.00 a month to satisfy
this requirement.  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying
Conditions 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19.(c) a history of not
meeting financial obligations are applicable.  Mitigating Condition 20.(d) the person
initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts also
applies.  His financial problems have been resolved.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.     
This Applicant has not demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does not meet
the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 3 of the SOR.  Paragraphs 2 and 4 are
found for the Applicant.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
10
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.l.: Against the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 3: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.d.: Against the Applicant.
   
 Paragraph 4: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  4.a.: For the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
