                                                              
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 07-18207 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O'Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on July 6, 2007. (Item 4)  On April 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement). (Item 1)  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 12, 2008.  He admitted the 
allegations under Guideline H, without providing any additional information or 
explanation.  He elected to have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. (Item 3) 
 
2 
 
 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 4, 2008.  
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on June 10, 2008, and 
was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the disqualifying conditions within 30 days.  He did not respond with 
additional information.  The case was assigned to me on August 15, 2008.  Based upon 
a review of the case file and the pleadings, eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under Guideline H.  I thoroughly and 
carefully reviewed the case file and the pleadings.  I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 20 years old and graduated from high school in 2006.  He started 
work for his employer, a defense contractor, in June 2007 as a maintenance mechanical 
specialist.  He is not married.   
 
Applicant stated on his security clearance application that he used marijuana four 
times from June 2005 until May 2007.  He stated on the application: 
 
I was young and every one was doing [sic] so I tried it but I no longer use 
it or have any desire to use in the future.  Upon being hired, I had to take a 
drug test and the results came back positive. I have been informed by 
Human Resource Manager [Name] that I will be subject to random testing 
by the company and that I will not know when I will be scheduled for tests.  
I agreed to these terms and will cooperate with all terms and conditions 
placed on me by [employer]. (Item 4 at 25) 
 
 Applicant admitted in an interview with security investigators on September 4, 
2007, that he used marijuana a total of four times from June 2005 until May 2007.  On 
each occasion he was with friends at social gatherings and he took two or three puffs 
from a marijuana cigarette that was being shared.  Applicant noted that he felt relaxed 
but otherwise did not care for the drug.  He tried it out of curiosity.  He has not used any 
other illegal drugs.  He has not received counseling or treatment for drug use or had 
adverse law enforcement problems based on drug use.  He tested positive in June 2007 
for marijuana when tested by his new employer.  His last use of marijuana had been a 
few weeks prior to the test.  He agreed to random future tests to maintain his position 
with the defense contractor.  He has no future intention to use marijuana or any other 
illegal drug. (Item 5 at 3) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  
Marijuana is listed as a drug in the Controlled Substance Act of 1970.  Drug abuse is 
the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s admits to using marijuana four times from June 2005 until May 2007.  
He also tested positive for marijuana in June 2007.  His drug use and positive test for 
marijuana raises Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug use); 
AG ¶ 25(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use); and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution).  Applicant had to possess the marijuana cigarette to use marijuana. 
 
 I have considered the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC).  
Applicant’s last admitted use was in May 2007.  He voluntarily took three or four puffs of 
a marijuana cigarette that was being passed around by friends at a social occasion.  DI 
MC AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.  
Applicant's used marijuana four times.  All of his use of marijuana was voluntary with his 
last use only a little over a year ago.  This makes his use of marijuana recent, frequent, 
and not under unusual circumstances.  Since his use was voluntary and in a gathering 
of friends, it may likely recur.   
 
 I considered DI MC AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the 
future, such as; (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts: (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used: (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence: (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation) does not apply.  Applicant stated he intents not to use marijuana in the 
future.  He has an agreement with his employer to be randomly tested for drug use.  
However, a stated intent not to use drugs is not sufficient to mitigate admitted drug use.  
Appellant has not presented information on any change of friends, environment, or 
social circumstances to indict he will not use drugs.  Only a little over a year has passed 
since Applicant's last admitted use of marijuana.  He has not noted any counseling or 
rehabilitation programs for drug use.  The only aspect of the mitigating condition that is 
applicable is Appellant's agreement with his employer to be randomly tested for drug 
use.  Applicant has not presented sufficient information to meet his heavy burden to 
mitigate his admitted use of marijuana.  Guideline H is decided against Applicant. 
 
 The Bond Amendment, 50 USC § 435b, prohibits all Federal agencies from 
granting or renewing a security clearance for any person who is an unlawful user of a 
controlled substance or is an addict.  The Department of Defense (DoD) issued interim 
guidance defining an unlawful user of a controlled substance as "a person who uses a 
controlled substance and has lost the power of self-control with reference to the use of 
the controlled substance, and any person who is a current user of the controlled 
substance in a manner other than as prescribed by a licensed physician."  Such use is 
not limited to the use of drugs on a particular day, or within a matter of days or weeks 
before, rather that the unlawful use has occurred recently enough to indicate that the 
individual is actively engaged in such conduct.  An "addict" of a controlled substance is 
defined as "an individual who habitually uses any narcotic drug so as to endanger the 
public morals, health, safety, or welfare; or is so far addicted to the use of narcotic drugs 
as to have lost the power of self-control with reference to his addiction. (Memorandum, 
Subject: Interim Guidance for the Implementation of Public Law 110-181, Section 3002 
 
5 
 
(the Bond Amendment) Regarding Adjudication of Security Clearances, date June 20, 
2008).  Applicant used marijuana four times, his last use being in May 2007.  Since his 
last use was over a year ago, there is no indication that he has lost self-control over the 
use of the drug or that he habitually uses the drug.  Applicant's use of marijuana does 
not rise to the level of a person prohibited from being granted a security clearance 
under the provisions of the Bond Amendment.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant is only 
20 years old and experimented with marijuana while a high school student and shortly 
thereafter.  I considered that his last use was over a year ago, that he stated his intent 
not to use illegal drugs in the future, and agreed to random drug testing by his 
employer.  A stated intention to not use drugs in the future is not sufficient by itself to 
overcome admitted voluntary use of drugs in the past. He has not provided sufficient 
information to mitigate the security concern based on his use of marijuana.  He has not 
indicated he has changed friends or social environment that led to his use of drugs.  He 
has not received counseling for drug use or participated in any rehabilitation programs.  
He agreed over a year ago to random testing for drug use.  He has not indicated 
whether he has been tested and that the results were negative.  Sufficient time has not 
passed since his last voluntary use of marijuana to indicate he will not use drugs in the 
future.  Applicant has failed to provide sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for his drug use and positive random test for marijuana.  Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s present and future 
abuse of drugs and his lack of good judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
willingness to follow rules and regulations.  He has not established that he is suitable for 
a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his abuse of marijuana.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
