 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-16386 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Thomas Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Personal 
Conduct, Criminal Conduct, and Drug Involvement. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), on October 12, 2006. On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, J and H for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response, which 
DOHA received on April 8, 2008, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 28, 
2008, and I received the case assignment on April 29, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 2, 2008, scheduling the case to be heard on May 22, 
2008. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
received without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, and testified on his 
own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.e. He denied SOR ¶ 1.c, 
and did not respond to ¶¶ 2., 2.a., 3., and 3.a. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old security officer, who has been employed by a 
government contractor since October 2006. He seeks to retain the interim secret 
security clearance he was granted shortly after completing his e-QIP in October 
2006. GE 1, Tr. 15, 35.  
 
Applicant dropped out of high school in 1971 after completing the 11th 
grade. He participated in a home study course offered through a 
vocational/technical/trade school from June 2000 to January 2003, and was 
awarded his high school diploma in February 2003. GE 1, Tr. 14-15, 33-35. He 
served in the U.S. Marine Corps from June 1972 to May 1976, and was honorably 
discharged as a lance corporal (pay grade E-3). His Military Occupational 
Specialty was 3051/Warehouse Clerk. GE 1, Tr. 36-37. Applicant has been 
married since July 1980, and has three adult stepchildren. 
 
When Applicant completed his October 2006 e-QIP, he failed to disclose 
material facts regarding his employment record, his past drug use, and his 
financial record. Regarding his employment record, he failed to disclose that he 
had been terminated in April 2006 by a previous employer for testing positive for 
marijuana during a drug test. (SOR ¶ 1.a.)  
 
Regarding his past drug use, he failed to disclose that he used marijuana, 
with varying frequency, to include four times weekly from about 1973 to April 
2006. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Regarding his financial record, he failed to disclose that his 
home went into foreclosure in March 2001, and was later sold at a public auction 
in May 2001. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) He denied this falsification, and testified that he “didn’t 
see that question on the security application” and that he “didn’t understand the 
question.” Tr. 29. 
 
 3
For purposes of clarification, Applicant was interviewed two times by an 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Investigator following submission of his 
October 2006 E-QIP. The first interview occurred in November 2006, and the 
second interview occurred in April 2007. When Applicant was interviewed the first 
time by an OPM Investigator, he was asked about his April 2006 termination for 
testing positive for marijuana. He lied to the OPM Investigator, telling him that he 
resigned from his job in anticipation of obtaining a different job. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
 
 During his first interview in November 2006 interview, Applicant stated the 
mortgage company foreclosed on his property and after doing so never contacted 
him or took any action against him. He added he became aware of the foreclosure 
when he saw it reported on his credit bureau report. GE 2. During that same 
interview, when asked about his past drug use, Applicant lied to the OPM 
Investigator telling him he had used marijuana 10 to 15 times during a one month 
period in 1994 and denied any further use of any illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant explained: 
 
When I was interviewed by an investigator for a clearance I did not 
think the interview was a serious matter and did not want anyone to 
know anything about shameful things in my past that I did which is 
why on the 2nd interview I told everything. I found out from a friend 
how serious the matter is. . . . I am a loyal citizen of these United 
States. I love my country very much and would never betray her. I 
am also not a thief. The only way I would give up classified info is to 
be killed defending it being at my post. (Response to SOR) 
 
It was during the second interview that he was more forthcoming about his 
April 2006 termination for drug use and his past use of drugs. GE 2. Applicant 
later revealed in the second interview he used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
to include four times weekly, from about 1973 to April 2006, discussed supra, and 
used heroin and cocaine one time in about 1974. (SOR ¶ 1.e.)  
 
Applicant has worked as a security officer for several employers since at 
least November 1983. GE 1. Other than his testimony, Applicant did not offer any 
additional evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as 
to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG & 15: 
 
 5
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
Two Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG ¶ 16 could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other government representative. 
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s falsifications 
by evidence submitted and his admissions. Together, they warrant application of 
these disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides for potentially applicable personal conduct mitigating 
conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully 
and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his October 2006 e-QIP response 
regarding his March 2001 foreclosure. In that same e-QIP, Applicant provided false 
responses regarding his employment record and past drug use, and also false and 
misleading responses to the OPM Investigator during his November 2006 interview. 
Having provided conflicting versions of past events, Applicant places the trier of fact in 
the difficult position of trying to determine when he is being truthful and when he is not 
being truthful. Once an Applicant’s credibility has been seriously compromised, it is 
difficult to accept an Applicant’s testimony at face value. Having evaluated the evidence, 
and observed the Applicant, I do not find him to be credible. 
 
Applicant’s falsifications prohibited the Government from evaluating his past 
employment record, his past illegal drug use, and his past foreclosure history in a timely 
fashion. He further inhibited the process by later lying to an OPM Investigator when 
asked about his employment record and past illegal drug use. Such revelations would in 
all likelihood have raised significant security concerns. In addition, it was not until the 
second OPM interview that Applicant disclosed the extent of his employment history 
and past drug use.  
 
Finally, while Applicant’s disclosure of his 2001 foreclosure in November 2006 
may have been forthright, it cannot be considered prompt. While I give Applicant some 
credit for coming forward, that credit is diluted by other factors to include his other 
falsifications. Applicants are expected to tell the Government the truth as part of the 
security clearance vetting process. Under the facts of this case, I am unable to apply 
any of the mitigating conditions under this concern. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
Two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG ¶ 31 could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Record evidence clearly established that Applicant intended to conceal his 
employment history, illegal drug use, and financial history from the Government and 
affect the course of his background investigation. For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to 
occur, the falsification must be material. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in 
United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a statement having a “natural 
tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making body to which 
it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d 
Cir.2004). 
 
  If Applicant had provided accurate answers to his e-QIP, such answers were 
capable of influencing the Government to deny him eligibility for a security clearance. 
His employment history, past drug use, and home foreclosure are sufficiently recent and 
serious to jeopardize his application for a security clearance. His omission from his e-
QIP is material. Accordingly, Guideline ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) apply to SOR ¶ 1 because 
Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001.   
  
AG ¶ 32 provides for potentially applicable Criminal Conduct Mitigating 
Conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. Applicant’s failure to disclose 
required information, discussed supra, demonstrates lack of candor required of cleared 
personnel. The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material 
adverse information about an Applicant before making a clearance decision. The 
Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a 
timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. Further, an 
applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some 
indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security 
concerns in the future, something the Government relies on to perform damage 
assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s conduct 
suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate Government 
interests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concerning relating to the Guideline for Drug Involvement is set out 
in AG ¶ 24: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 AG ¶ 25 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any drug abuse;  
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifying conditions 
through evidence submitted and Applicant’s admissions.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable Drug Involvement Mitigating 
Conditions: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation; 
Given Applicant’s lengthy involvement with drug abuse while in a position of trust 
and responsibility, absence of any rehabilitative evidence, and recent usage, I am 
unable to apply any of the potential mitigating conditions under this Guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
9
                                                          
In all of the security concerns discussed supra, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition or conditions. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Falsifications are a core security 
concern. Applicant’s behavior was deliberate and not due to circumstances beyond his 
control. His misconduct was both recent and frequent. I note Applicant’s drug use began 
in 1973 and continued until 2006, a period of 33 years. He failed to disclose his drug 
use by falsifying his October 2006 e-QIP, and compounded his first falsification when he 
later lied to the OPM Investigator about his past drug use in his first interview. I have 
considered Applicant’s explanation and evidence presented, but that does not 
overcome the adverse inferences of his misconduct. Honesty is a core requirement for 
clearance access, and is not a difficult concept to understand or adhere to.  
 
Rehabilitation or behavioral changes are difficult to measure under these 
circumstances, given the length of time Applicant used drugs when compared to the 
relatively short time since he quit using drugs. He clearly sought to mislead the 
Government about his drug, employment, and foreclosure history, or was at least willing 
to benefit from his misconduct. Applicant’s willingness to put his personal needs ahead 
of legitimate Government interests increases his potential vulnerability, and he has not 
demonstrated that the misconduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole person factors”1 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
1See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 
 
 
10
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
