                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14399 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a Syrian born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since 1998. Applicant’s sisters are dual Lebanese and Canadian citizens residing 
in Lebanon, his brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in Lebanon, and his step-
son is a dual U.S and Egyptian citizen living in Egypt. Applicant’s wife and two children 
are U.S. citizens living in the U.S. He has more connections to the United States than to 
Lebanon. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 5, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  
  
 On April 4, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 9, 2008. Six documents (Items 1-6) were 
part of the FORM. Applicant was sent a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant's response to the FORM was due on June 
15, 2008, 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. As of July 7, 2008, no response 
had been received. On July 7, 2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Lebanon and Egypt. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as Items I─XXIII. Applicant’s counsel argued that the facts 
administratively noticed must be limited to matters of general knowledge and matters 
not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations, with 
explanation. Applicant is a 58-year-old linguist working for a defense contractor working 
with the U.S. Army since December 2005. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
From January 2006 to January 2007, Applicant worked as a linguist in Iraq. (Item 5) As 
an Arabic linguist, he works with the joint coalition in one of Saddam Hussein’s former 
palaces in the “green zone” providing information to the U.S. Army and the Iraqi 
National Police. In February 2007, he was scheduled to return to Iraq for another year. 
The record is silent as to his return.  
 
 Applicant was born in Syria, but was never a citizen of Syria. (Item 5) His parents 
were citizens of Lebanon and of Lebanese heritage. His father was a dual citizen of 
Lebanon and Canada. (Item 5) In 1956, when Applicant was six years old, his family 
moved from Syria to Lebanon. (Item 6) He does not remember being in Syria. Applicant 
received his high school education and his bachelor’s degree in hotel management in 
Lebanon. During the Lebanese civil war, which lasted from 1975 to 1990, Applicant was 
living in a Christian area of Beirut and had to cross into a Muslim area to get to his job at 
the airport. In 1985, he was walking with his wife when attacked. His attackers 
threatened to beat and behead him. (Item 5) Applicant decided it was time to leave 
Lebanon. In 1989, he obtained his “green card.” 
 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
 
In July 1995, he became a U.S. citizen. As a U.S. citizen, Applicant states his 
loyalty and allegiance are to the U.S. and has no foreign preference. (Items 2 and 5) 
Applicant and his wife gave up their expired Lebanese passports. They are unable to 
revoke their Lebanese National Identification cards. The cards identify which directorate 
or tribal area of Lebanon Applicant came from. Applicant has no obligation to the 
Lebanese government. (Item 5) He has no financial or business ties outside the U.S.  
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Egypt and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 
1995. In April 1976, Applicant and his wife were married. They have two children born in 
Lebanon, a daughter born in 1978 and a son born in December 1979. Both became 
U.S. citizens in July 1995.  
 
Applicant’s step-son was born in Egypt in 1970 and educated as a sound 
engineer in the U.S. His step-son is a dual citizen of Egypt and the U.S. His step-son 
lives in Egypt, is married, and has two children. In 2006, Applicant and his wife spent 
two weeks in Egypt visiting his step-son. In 2004, Applicant and his wife visited his step-
son in Egypt for one week.  
  
 Applicant’s brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen living in Lebanon. He received his 
U.S. citizenship in April 1996 and is married to an Italian. Applicant has contact with his 
brother every two or three months. Applicant has a sister living in California who 
became a U.S. citizen in 1999. Applicant has two sisters living in Lebanon who are dual 
citizens of Lebanon and Canada. He has contact with them every three or four months. 
One of his sisters was caring for Applicant’s elderly parents before they died in 2004. 
One sister and her husband own a civil engineering business.   
 
 When his parents were alive, Applicant periodically traveled to Lebanon to see 
them. He has not traveled to Lebanon since 2004. He states he has no reason to go to 
Lebanon. Applicant was unable to attend his parent’s funeral because he was in Iraq 
working as an Arabic linguist for the U.S. Army at the time and travel to Lebanon was 
prohibited. When his parents were alive, Applicant traveled to Lebanon in 2001, 2003, 
and 2004.  
 
Lebanon 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Lebanon is a nominal 
democracy with a less-than-perfect human rights record. It has both a long history of 
civil war and of foreign influence by Syria. Lebanon is not a state sponsor of terrorism, 
but is a permissive environment for groups recognized by the U.S. as terrorist 
organizations, which Lebanon considers "freedom fighters" against Israel. The U.S. 
State Department continues to maintain a travel warning for U.S. citizens contemplating 
travel to Lebanon. Lebanon is not known to be a collector of intelligence or economic 
information against the U.S.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
Egypt 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Egypt is a republic with a strong 
executive. The United States and Egypt enjoy a strong and friendly relationship based 
on shared mutual interests in Middle East peace and stability, strengthening trade 
relations, and promoting regional security.2 The threat of terrorism in Egypt remains 
high and transnational terrorist groups and local terrorist groups pose threats in Egypt 
despite Egypt’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists and “Zero tolerance” policy on 
extremism.3 In 2003, Egypt discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot against U.S. 
interests.4 Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly, coordinated 
terrorist bombings, which cause many deaths and hundreds of injuries, including U.S. 
citizens.5 “Although the Egyptian government took measures against the perpetrators of 
the 2004 and 2005 attacks, a 2006 bombing reflects a persistent, indigenous threat of 
terror activities.6 
 
Terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities to exploit and undermine 
U.S. national security interests. Terrorist organizations currently target the U.S. for 
intelligence collection through human espionage and other means.7 Terrorist groups 
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.  
 
The State Department notes the Egypt’s human rights record is poor and serious 
abuses continue in many areas. Problems include: restriction of freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, and association, denial of fair trial, lack of due process, limitations on 
the right of citizens to change their government, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, 
poor prison conditions, political prisoners and detainees, torture, as well as executive 
branch limitation on an independent judiciary. Torture in Egyptian detention centers is 
pervasive.8  
 
Opposition parties continue to lodge credible complaints about election 
manipulation by the government even though recent elections were more transparent 
2 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, March 2008. (Item XIV) 
 
3 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, March 2008 (Item XVI); U.S. Department of State, Patterns of 
Global Terrorism 2003, April 29, 2004 (Item XVII); and U.S. Department of State, Appendix B – Background 
Information of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations, April 29, 2004 (Item XIX) 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Patterns of Global Terrorism 2003, April 29, 2004 (Item XVII) 
 
5 Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2 – Country Reports: Middle East and North Africa 
Overview, April 30, 2007. (Item VII) 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Statement for the Record by Michelle Van Cleave from the national Counterintelligence Executive, Before the 
House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security and Claims, Hearing on Sources and Methods of 
Foreign National Engaged in Economic and Military Espionage. (Item XXI) 
 
8 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2007, March 2008. (Item EXI) 
 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
and better executed than in the past.9 There remain significant restrictions on the 
political process and freedom of expression for non-governmental organizations.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
9 Id. 
 
10 Id. 
 
 
 
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens 
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. AG & 6 
 
I have considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions. Conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying are listed under AG & 7. 
AG & 7(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” and AG & 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information,” apply. 
 
 In 1985, Applicant moved to the U.S. after having been attacked in Lebanon and 
threatened with being beaten and beheaded. In 1995, more than 13 years ago, he, his 
wife and two children became U.S. citizens. He has no foreign assets, investments, 
financial or business interests in Lebanon. 
 
 Applicant’s two sisters reside in Lebanon. They are dual Lebanese and Canadian 
citizens. He has contact with his sisters three or four times a year by telephone. His 
brother who is a U.S. citizen resides in Lebanon. He has contact with his brother every 
two or three months. None of his siblings or their spouses have connections with any 
foreign government. Because of his job as a linguist with the U.S. Army in Iraq, he was 
unable to visit Lebanon when his parents died. Applicant last visited Lebanon in 2004. 
While danger certainly exists for all who reside in Lebanon, his siblings are in no greater 
danger than any other individual living and working there.  
 
 Applicant’s step son is a dual U.S. and Egyptian citizen living in Egypt. Applicant 
and his wife visited his step-son in Egypt for one week in 2004 and two weeks in 2006. 
While danger certainly exists for all who reside in Egypt, his step-son is in no greater 
danger than any other individual living and working there.  
 
 
 
 
7
¶ 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.” and ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual=s sense of loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” apply to Applicant’s siblings and step-son.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant stated he is loyal to the 
U.S. and would do nothing to compromise U.S. interests. His allegiance is exclusively to 
the U.S. Applicant was born in Syria and moved to Lebanon at age six. In 1985, he left 
Lebanon and came to the U.S. In 1995, Applicant, his wife, and two children became 
U.S. citizens, and live in the U.S.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Lebanon and Egypt and the 
heavy burden an applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country. 
His sibling’s jobs, that of their spouses’ or his step-son’s job are not connected to any 
foreign government. His sisters are dual Lebanese and Canadian citizens, his brother is 
a U.S. citizen, and his step-son is a dual U.S. and Egyptian citizen.  
 
There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Applicant served a year 
with the U.S. Army as a linguist in the “green zone” working closely with the U.S. 
military. As an Arabic linguist working in a combat zone he is a valuable resource to the 
 
 
 
8
                                                          
Army in helping it achieve its mission in Iraq.11 Because of his close ties and his 
loyalties to the U.S., including his wife and two children (all U.S. citizens), he would 
resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, duress, or conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1e: For Applicant 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
11In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when “an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
national security . . . [and therefore he] can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign 
power=s attempts at coercion or exploitation.” 
