 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16806 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 23, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on 
June 16, 2008, and reassigned to me on July 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on July 17, 2008, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 12, 2008. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
August 21, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, as contained in GE 3 through 5. These are 
InfoFacts sheets provided by the National Institute of Drug Abuse, National Institute of 
Health, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. Applicant did not object and the 
request was approved. The characteristics of these drugs are well known. While I have 
considered the nature of the drugs in my decision, I have not explicitly listed specific 
facts about the drugs in the Findings of Facts. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with 
his current employer since about August 2006. He is attending community college. He is 
single with no children.1  
 
 Applicant first smoked marijuana in about 1987, when he was in high school. He 
continued to smoke marijuana on an occasional basis until about June 2006. He 
estimated that he used marijuana about 20 times in the ten years between 1996 and 
2006. When he was a teenager, he and a friend tried to grow two marijuana plants with 
seeds from their marijuana. Both seeds sprouted but quickly died. He has not tried to 
grow marijuana since. He also used heroin on one occasion in about 2004, and cocaine 
on about two occasions in about 2005.2  
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on January 30, 2007. He completely listed his illegal drug use in the 
Questionnaire. He also fully discussed his drug use during his background interview on 
August 17, 2007. He admitted that there was an impact on his judgment, reliability, and 
ability to hold a confidence when he smoked marijuana. Applicant told the investigator 
that he would never use cocaine or heroin again, but he could not absolutely rule out 
the use of marijuana at some point in the future. Applicant later explained that he was 
attempting to be 100% honest with the investigator. He had no intention or “desire to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
use marijuana, but if, maybe five years from [then], it was offered to [him] in an ideal 
social setting. [he] might accept.”3 
 
Since the 2007 interview, Applicant’s stance on marijuana has crystallized. In his 
response to the SOR he stated: 
 
It was my hope that this statement would not lead to an understanding that 
I use marijuana because I do not. I have no desire to use marijuana now 
or in the future so I would like to clarify, for the record, that I will not use 
marijuana in the future. Now that I understand it violates provisions in the 
DoD guidelines and since I honestly have no desire to try it again, I can 
assert that I will never use marijuana again. 
 
 Applicant last used marijuana in June 2006, about two months before he started 
his current job. He passed the employer’s drug test, which is consistent with his 
statements about his last use of marijuana. Applicant moved in November 2006 to a 
town that is in the same general geographic area as he used to live, but fairly remote 
and relatively distant. He no longer associates with the people he used drugs with. He is 
focused on school and his career. His current friends and associates do not use drugs. 
He admitted that his drug use showed poor judgment. He stated unequivocally and 
credibly that he will never use illegal drugs again. He is willing to sign a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.4   
 
 Applicant submitted performance appraisals from 2007 and 2008. His 2007 
appraisal reported that he “works well and gets along with all members of this team and 
is proving to be a valued member of this organization.” His manager reported in 2008 
that he “provides superior customer satisfaction to all our customers and is a respected 
member of the team.” He has taken little or no time off since he started working. His 
company earnings statement reflects that Applicant works overtime, contributes to his 
401(k) retirement plan, and has accrued an extensive balance of vacation/paid time off 
(PTO).5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-34. 
 
5 Tr. at 17-18; AE A-C. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
5 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;   
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
 Applicant’s drug possession,6 use, and attempt to grow marijuana are sufficient 
to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) as disqualifying conditions. His failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use in his 2007 interview raises AG ¶ 25(h).  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant admitted to using illegal drugs up until June 2006. His drug use was too 
recent for him to receive the full benefit of AG ¶ 26(a). In an attempt to be totally honest 
with the background investigator in 2007, he stated that he could not completely rule out 
smoking marijuana in the future. Since that interview, his intentions against using illegal 
drugs have hardened. He has a good job with an established company. He made his 
                                                          
6 Drugs must be possessed in order to be used. 
 
 
6 
 
work and education a priority. He moved away and no longer associates with people 
who use drugs. He is willing to sign a statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. AG ¶ 26(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 39 years old. Of 
concern is his episodic drug use, which included experimentations with the harder 
drugs, cocaine and heroin, and continued well into his 30s. He chose to break the law 
every time he used illegal drugs. However, he presented himself as someone who has 
finally matured and moved past the mistakes of the not-so-young. He has been 
completely forthright about his drug use throughout the process. I found him to be a 
truthful, credible witness. When Applicant’s drug use is looked at over the last ten years, 
it adds up to being extensive. But a closer examination reveals that it occurred several 
times a year. It was never frequent enough to dominate his life. He has moved on and is 
dedicated to education and his career. I am satisfied that illegal drugs are no longer a 
part of his life.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
7 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
