                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12547 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On June 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 15, 2007, admitted all of the 
allegations, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 18, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 25, 2008, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 21, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and submitted Exhibit (AE) A through BB. Department Counsel objected to all of the 
documents except B, L, N, Q, Y, AA and BB on the basis of relevance.1 I overruled the 
objection and the documents were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on August 27, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since February 
2006. He was born in Australia and graduated from college there. He came to the U.S. 
in 1985 on a work visa and obtained a green card in 1988. He has resided in the U.S. 
since 1985. In 1991 he earned a master’s degree from an American university. He 
married a U.S. citizen in 1996 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. He 
explained the reason it took so long was because at the time the waiting period was 
between eight and ten years.2 Shortly after becoming a U.S. citizen he obtained a U.S. 
passport. He retained his active Australian passport and used it to travel to Australia in 
2006. He used his Australian passport “because I could pass quicker as an Australian. 
Because I am a citizen, yeah.”3 
 
 Applicant has a bank account in Australia that he maintained since 1985. He had 
at one time approximately $22,000 U.S. dollars in it for his niece and nephew’s 
educational expenses. This money was revenue from an apartment he owned there and 
sold in 2004. He has since transferred the money for educational expenses for his niece 
and nephew and the account has about a $15 balance. He paid both Australian and 
U.S. taxes on his investment property. He has no other assets located in Australia. He 
has approximately $1 million in assets in the U.S.4 
 
 Applicant is entitled to a pension in Australia because of his employment while he 
lived there. He would receive this pension regardless of what his citizenship status is 
and whether he retires in the U.S. or Australia. It might be subject to a means test. He 
would also be entitled to U.S. social security. Although the Australian pension is not 
contingent on his location, Applicant wants to keep his Australian citizenship just in case 
there is an issue. He did not anticipate this would be an issue until the distant future. He 
considers the Australian pension as “purely a safety net for myself and my wife.” He 
stated “my concern with the pension has always been really to take [care of] my wife so 
1 Many of the documents presented by Applicant were press releases, joint communiqués and 
other articles. I considered all of the documents Applicant presented and gave it the appropriate weight in 
accordance with the factual issues important to the case. 
 
2 Tr. 40-45. 
 
3 Tr. 37-38. 
 
4 Tr. 41-44, 55, 58. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
that she could return to Australia. I always thought that I would only ever be eligible for 
an Australian pension if I returned to Australia, which I don’t see that happening.” He 
went on to say that the reason for retaining his Australian citizenship was “sentimental 
reasons.”5 
 
 Applicant considers himself a dual citizen of Australia and the United States. He 
acknowledged he took an oath of allegiance to the U.S. when he became a citizen. He 
stated he takes that oath seriously and he accepts his obligation to the U.S. above all 
others. He also read the oath that says he renounced and abjure absolutely and entirely 
all allegiance to any foreign principal, state, or sovereign, to which he was a subject or 
citizen. Applicant went on to explain “My point is that this actually shows that I am 
primarily a U.S. citizen, even though I was born in Australia.”6 Applicant then clearly 
stated he is not willing to renounce his Australian citizenship.7 He uses his Australian 
passport to enter and exit Australia. This is a requirement for Australian citizens. He 
stated: “Regarding the Australian passport, I’m actually required; I cannot have my 
passport destroyed because the Australian government requires that I must have a 
passport when in Australia. As an Australian citizen, I can not have a strange passport, I 
cannot use a U.S. passport when in Australia, and I cannot obtain a visa to Australia.”8 
When questioned, Applicant admitted that the reason he has to use his Australian 
passport is because he claims citizenship there. If he was not claiming Australian 
citizenship, he would be permitted to use his American passport.9 He went on to say “I 
want to keep my dual citizenship, yes.”10 
 
 In answering interrogatories Applicant stated he was willing to perform military 
service or bear arms for Australia.11 He believes he must abide by the Australian laws 
and if they were to go to war and he was required to serve in the military he would do as 
required because he is a citizen of Australia. If fighting a war is a requirement of his 
Australian citizenship then he will abide by the requirement because of his citizenship 
status. He believes this is consistent with his U.S. citizen status because the two 
countries are allies. In the unlikelihood he would have to choose between Australia and 
5 Tr. 36-37, 48-53; AE R. 
 
6 Tr.29-30. 
 
7 Tr. 30-31. 
 
8 Tr. 31. 
 
9 Tr. 32.  
 
10 Tr. 35. 
 
11 GE 2, question 26, Tr. 56. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
the U.S. his response was “I would probably have to bear arms for the U.S.”12 Appellant 
understands that he does not have to be a dual citizen, but that he chooses to be.13 
 
 Applicant traveled to Australia in 2006 for three months as a requirement of his 
job. He used his Australian passport to enter and exit the country. He used his U.S. 
passport to exit the U.S. and return. Although he does not have any current plans to 
visit Australian he can not rule it out. Applicant has surrendered his Australian passport 
to his security manager. He stated it can not be destroyed because as a dual citizen he 
will need it to gain entry into Australia.14 Therefore, he will retain it and use it for any 
trips he may take to Australia in the future. When Applicant travels any place outside the 
U.S. except Australia, he uses his U.S. passport. Applicant has made up his mind and 
does not intend on retiring to Australia.  
 
 Applicant has not voted in Australia since 1999. He has voted in all elections and 
primaries in the U.S. since becoming a citizen.15 Applicant considers himself an 
Australian citizen and bound by its laws.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
12 Tr. 56-59. 
 
13 Tr. 60. 
 
14 Tr. 35-36. 
 
15 Tr.55. 
 
5 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered AG ¶ 10 (a) (“exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country… (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country”) and (b) (“action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship 
by an American citizen.”) Applicant maintains an active Australian passport and uses it 
when he travels there. He considers himself a dual citizen and acknowledges he is 
bound by Australian laws. Applicant continued to use his Australian passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen. He acknowledges that if he did not consider himself an 
Australian citizen and renounced that status, he would be permitted to enter Australia 
 
6 
 
 
on his U.S. passport. Instead because he maintains his citizenship with Australia he 
must comply with the entry and exit laws and all other laws. Applicant admitted that as 
an Australian citizen if he was required to serve in the Australian military he would do 
so. Finally, although he stated that he does not have to be a citizen of Australia to 
collect certain pension rights, he wants to ensure he maintains his citizenship as a 
safety net for his pension. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and especially 
considered (a) (“dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country”); (b) (“the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship”) and (e) (“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”) Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based 
solely on his birth in Australia. Although he was born in Australia, since he became a 
U.S. citizen he used his Australian passport and has exercised his rights and obligations 
as an Australian citizen. He has exercised his Australian citizenship by choice, thereby 
negating the application of (a). Applicant is not willing to renounce his Australian 
citizenship, and has made a conscious decision not to because he wants to maintain 
any rights he may have in that country. Hence, I find (b) does not apply. Applicant has 
surrendered his passport to the cognizant security authority. His actions have met the 
specific language of the mitigating condition, but not the spirit of it because he intends to 
retrieve the passport when he travels to Australia. Again, as an Australian citizen he is 
required to enter and exit the country on that passport. So although (e) applies, it is not 
enough to overcome the other facts of his Australian citizenship status because his 
surrender is conditioned upon it being returned to him when he wants to travel to 
Australia.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen who wants to retain his dual citizenship status with Australia. He has used his 
Australian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen to enter and exit that country because 
 
7 
 
 
it is required of its citizens by Australia. Applicant is unwilling to renounce his citizenship 
with Australia and does not want to affect any potential rights he may have there. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. RIcciardello 
Administrative Judge 
