1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-16983
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 7, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 24,
2006. On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on May 8, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
May 20, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 27, 2008, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on June 24, 2008.  The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
submitted Exhibits A through O, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr) on July 2, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
2
July 8, 2008, to submit additional matters.  He failed to submit any additional
documents, and the record closed on July 8, 2008. Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations1.a., 1.b., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., and
1.j., and he denied 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 2.a. The admitted allegations are incorporated
herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 47 years old. He is currently married for a second time, and he has
three children and one stepchild. 
Applicant works for defense contractors, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations regarding financial difficulties under Adjudicative
Guideline F (1.a. through 1.j). All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order
as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $304.
Applicant testified that this debt was from a cable company for three pieces of
equipment that remained in his possession. He claimed that he has now returned the
pieces of equipment, and he had a receipt showing this debt had been resolved. Upon
cross examination from Department Counsel, Applicant conceded that this was a
different debt from this creditor, and he has not yet resolved this debt. 
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $610,
and Applicant testified that it remains unpaid. 
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,169.
Applicant testified that this debt had been paid. Exhibit O consists of a one page
statement of account from this creditor, showing that the creditor has received full
payment on this debt. I find that this previously overdue debt  has been resolved. 
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,620,
and it remains unpaid. Applicant testified that he had paid approximately $6,000 to the
collection agency for this debt as he was informed that $6,000 would be payment in full.
He was not sure why the credit report still show $2,000 owing on this debt, but he is in
3
the process of disputing the $2,000 remaining on this debt. Exhibit J is a letter from the
collection agency for this creditor, which states that Applicant’s payment had resolved
this debt. It appears that Applicant has made a good faith effort to resolve this debt. 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,654.
Applicant testified that this debt for the repossession of a vehicle, that he cosigned for
his daughter, has been paid. Exhibit K includes a copy of check made out to the creditor
on February 8, 2008, in the full amount that is owing. I find that this previously overdue
debt has been resolved.
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $587,
and Applicant testified that it remains unpaid. 
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $953,
and Applicant testified that it remains unpaid.
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $605,
and Applicant testified that it remains unpaid.
1.i. In March 1997, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 petition of bankruptcy in the United
States Bankruptcy Court.
1.j. In July 1997, the Chapter 7  bankruptcy petition, previously filed by Applicant
on March 1997, discharged Applicant’s debts. Applicant testified that his previous wife
had incurred a considerable amount of debt while they were married. After they were
divorced, she did not contribute to paying any of these debts, so he finally filed for
bankruptcy, which did discharge all of his debts.  
Applicant cited several factors for his current financial difficulties. When he was
transferred because of his employment his income was reduced significantly. Also, his
wife became unexpectedly pregnant, 19 years after her last pregnancy, and they
incurred between $5,000 and $6,000 in medical bills, above what was covered under
their insurance policy. 
When he was transferred to California he continued to make payments on his
home in New Mexico, which he has successfully retained. He also testified that he put
between $7,000 and $9,000 into this home so it could be rented. As of the month of the
hearing he now has a renter, and he will have an additional $900 a month to help him
resolve his overdue debts. He also sold a piece of property that he owned, and with the
proceeds of that sale he paid $21,000 for one year rent, which will soon end, for a home
for him and his wife and new son.
Applicant testified that his plan has been to resolve the largest overdue debts first
and then take care of the smaller one. He represents that his current finances are in
good order and he believes that he will be able to pay all his current and future bills in a
timely manner.
4
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a. Applicant executed a signed Security Clearance Application (SCA) on
October 24, 2006 (Exhibit 1). Question 28A asks, if in the last 7 years, Applicant has
been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to this
question. The Government alleges that Applicant should have answered “Yes” to this
question and included the debts listed as 1.a. through 1.h., in the SOR.
Applicant agreed that he should have responded “Yes” to that question and
included all of his debts, but he averred that through inattentiveness he did not list the
debts on the SOR. He testified credibly that he did not intend to mislead the
Government on his SCA, and he pointed out other errors that he made on the SCA to
show that he was not as careful as he should have been, but he did not knowing furnish
false information. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Under AG ¶ 19 (a), an Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially
disqualifying. Similarly under AG  ¶ 19 (c), a history of not meeting financial obligations
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and was
unable to pay some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. As noted above, some of
the financial problems arose from Applicant’s transfer of employment with significant
loss of income, the dissolution of his previous marriage which resulted in his bankruptcy
6
filing in 1997, and the medical bill of his current spouse, because of her unexpected
pregnancy.  Applicant  acted responsibly in continuing to pay his for the support of his
wife and his their new son and managing his property assets by repairing his home so it
could be rented out. I find this potentially mitigating condition is a factor for
consideration in this case. 
AG ¶  20 (d) is also applicable as the evidence is clear that Applicant has
initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors and otherwise resolve his
debts. Applicant has now reduced his overdue debt from $13,502 to $3,059, and  he
has indicated he will be able to resolve the remainder as well.  
 Applicant has now satisfied most of his financial difficulties, and he is better
prepared for future contingencies. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions
apply.
GUIDELINE E, PERSONAL CONDUCT
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
While AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying, I find that none apply in this case. As discussed above, Applicant was
credible in his testimony that he did not knowingly furnish the Government with false or
incomplete information regarding his finances on questions 28a of the SCA that he
completed. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
7
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s reasons for his previous
financial difficulties, his conscientious efforts to resolve his overdue debts, and his
improving economic condition today, I find that the record evidence leaves me without
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated
the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
