                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13152 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations. As of the date 
of the hearing, he had 11 accounts, owing approximately $95,700 all of which had been 
delinquent for many years. His evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track 
record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate security concerns regarding 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2005, Applicant submitted an Office of Personnel Management 
Security Clearance Application or Standard Form (SF) 86.1 On December 21, 2007, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
1  GE 1.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The 
SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2008. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 14, 2008. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 21). Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, and presented no witnesses or documentary evidence (Tr. 23). DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 24, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The Government elected not to pursue, and presented no evidence, concerning 
the allegations in SOR ¶ 2 (Tr. 14-15). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the SOR allegations with the exception of SOR ¶ 1.o, which 
he admitted with an explanation. SOR ¶ 1.j and SOR ¶ 1.k alleged the same debt. The 
allegations were consolidated under SOR ¶ 1.j. His admission is incorporated herein as 
a finding of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old sheet metal journeyman (ductwork installer) working 
for a Government contractor (Tr. 86). In 1986, he completed his Associate’s Degree in 
computer programming (Tr. 5). He has been continuously employed as a sheet metal 
journeyman since 1995 for different employers (GE 1). Applicant has had only two 
breaks in his employment history. He was laid off in 1995 and 2000 on each occasion 
for a three month period (Tr. 62). He has worked for his current employer, a 
Government contractor, since February 2002. He has no police record, and there is no 
evidence he has used or trafficked in illegal drugs. 
 
 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant has been married twice. He married his first wife in 1986, and they 
were divorced in 1992. He has a 21-year-old son of this marriage, who is attending 
college. Applicant does not contribute financially to his son’s college education. He 
married his current wife in 1995. She has medical problems related to her diabetic 
condition, and a stroke she suffered in 2001 (Tr. 63). After her stroke, his wife was 
unemployed for six months. She tried to go back to work in 2002, but she never fully 
recovered and her medical condition did not allow her to go back to work (Tr. 72, 94-
95). She also suffers from gout; bone spurs, and is blind in one eye (Tr. 65). 
 
Applicant’s wife was sick again in 2004. She was unable to work for two years 
and had no earnings. She applied for social security disability payments, but it took her 
two years to receive her payments. During his wife’s unemployment, Applicant has been 
forced to use his credit cards to pay for his wife’s medications–approximately $350 a 
month insurance co-payment, and their day-to-day living expenses. His wife receives 
$1,200 a month in social security disability payments, and $175 monthly retired pay 
from her prior employer (Tr. 64). 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his SF 86, and three credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 
September 2005 (GE 2), October 2007 (GE 3), and January 2008 (GE 4). The SOR 
alleges 13 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately $98,000.  
 
Applicant has disputed most of the debts alleged in the SOR for several reasons. 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($9,439), 1.c ($12,444), 1.d ($23,209), 1.e ($2,792), 1.f 
($13,313), 1.g, ($8,494), 1.h ($47), 1.l ($6,631), and 1.m ($7,082), Applicant explained 
these were his credit card debts which became delinquent because of his three month 
period of unemployment in 2000, and his wife’s inability to work after 2001 due to her 
severe medical problems. He claimed his financial problems were aggravated in 
October 2004 because of the additional expenses created by his wife’s medical 
condition and her inability to work and contribute to the household finances. 
 
In 2004, Applicant and his wife went on a week vacation to Florida. When they 
returned, he did not have the money to pay for many of his credit card debts and missed 
payments. The creditors imposed over the limit fees, late fees, and raised the interest 
rate on his credit card debts. Applicant became upset and refused to pay the principal or 
any additional credit card charges. The debts have been in collection or sold to different 
collection agencies. Applicant admitted most of the debts alleged in the SOR were 
originally his debts. He is disputing the total of the debts (limit fees, late fees, and high 
interest rates) and challenging the collecting agencies’ ownership of his debts because 
he does not recognize the creditors (Tr. 24, 70-72). 
 
He disputed SOR ¶ 1.a and the creditor requested arbitration to resolve the 
dispute (Tr. 29-32). He also disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m and the creditors filed suit 
against Applicant to recover the debts. Applicant retained counsel to represent him in 
 
 
4 
 
these legal proceedings in April 2004. Applicant stated that if he were to lose the suit, 
his wife would give him the money to pay the debts from her inheritance money. SOR ¶ 
1.b alleged a $158 medical bill; however, the provider, creditor or debt holder is not 
identified. Applicant has no means to determine whether this is his debt or whether the 
debt is valid. He promised he would take care of the debt if he could identify the 
provider (Tr. 32-33). Applicant claimed he settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i ($2,073) 
in December 2007 (Tr. 39-40).  
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.h ($47), he claimed the telephone service provider promised 
to give him credit for lack of services and did not follow through with his promise (Tr. 
38). Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j ($12,439), Applicant claimed he did not 
recognize the creditor and that this was not his debt. Regarding SOR ¶ 1.n ($312), he 
claimed he had a contractual dispute with the telephone service provider.  
 
Applicant’s take home pay is around $3,200 a month without overtime. He works 
overtime whenever he can; however, the overtime opportunities fluctuate and he has no 
control over it (Tr. 46-47). His monthly expenses are as follows (Tr. 50-52): $600 
mortgage (he is current on his payments); $200 home owners association fees; $300 
utilities (gas and electricity); $800 food; and $400 commuting expenses. He has 
approximately $60,000 in a 401(k) retirement plan (Tr. 54). As of the hearing date, 
Applicant was carrying three credit cards: an American Express card owing $8,000; a 
Visa with no balance; and a Costco credit card with a $1,200 balance (Tr. 98). Applicant 
and his wife have three paid off vehicles. He drives a 1999 Tahoe. His wife drives a 
1999 Mercury Grand Marquis and a 2006 Scion XB (Tr. 100). He has approximately 
$100 monthly remaining after paying his day-to-day living expenses (Tr. 100).   
 
In addition to owning his home, Applicant owns two time share properties. He 
bought the first time share property in 2002 (Tr. 57) for a closing fee of $3,000 (Tr. 77). 
He bought the second time share in South Africa in 2003 for $1.000. He pays 
approximately $1,000 a year in maintenance fees for both time share properties (Tr. 
78). He exchanges his time shares for vacation time in other vacation resorts. Since 
purchasing his time share properties in 2002-2003, Applicant and his wife have been on 
vacation at least three weeks a year during 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. In 2007, 
they vacationed for two weeks (Tr. 78). 
 
In 2007, Applicant sought the advice of a bankruptcy attorney seeking to resolve 
his debts. However, he was advised that filing for bankruptcy protection would not be in 
his best interests (Tr. 68, 75). He has retained counsel to represent him in two pending 
law suits from creditors. Notwithstanding, Applicant testified he has not participated in 
any financial counseling. At most, the financial counseling he has received is quite 
limited. He presented no budget or plans to pay his delinquent debts. Applicant believes 
most of his delinquent debts are time-barred, and he intends to rely on the statute of 
limitations to resolve his debts (Tr. 75). He also claimed he looked into consolidating his 
debts, but did not pursue the consolidation because he did not trust the consumer credit 
counseling company (Tr. 96).  
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                          
Applicant was advised not to make any payments on his old debts because that 
would reaffirm his debts and begin anew the statute of limitations (Tr. 115). He is 
waiting for his creditors to bring suit against him to then resolve the delinquent debts in 
court. He averred he is working on resolving his delinquent debts, but that it will take 
some time. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”3 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
3  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                          
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).4 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is well documented in his credit reports and his 
testimony. As of the hearing date, he had 11 outstanding debts totaling approximately 
$95,700. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
4  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                          
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,5 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant presented little evidence of good-faith efforts 
taken to contact creditors, or to resolve his debts since he acquired them. Although 
there is evidence that he has participated in some financial counseling (consulting with 
a bankruptcy attorney and the attorney representing him in the law suits), there are no 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or are under control.  
 
I specifically considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 
20(b): “The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances”, and conclude it applies, but only to a limited extent.  
 
Applicant’s testimony established factors that may be considered as 
circumstances beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his 
two three month periods of unemployment; his wife’s medical condition and the financial 
expenses associated with it; the lack of financial assistance from his wife; and the bad 
5  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
8 
 
decision to purchase and retain two time share properties as well as taking vacations 
that were unaffordable.  
 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he has dealt responsibly with his 
financial obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR. Applicant has been 
consistently employed, except for two three month periods he was laid off in 1995 and 
2000. Since 2002, he has continuously worked for his current employer. He presented 
little evidence to show paid debts, settlements, documented negotiations, payment 
plans, budgets, or financial assistance/counseling. Applicant’s financial history and lack 
of favorable evidence preclude a finding that he has established a track record of 
financial responsibility, or that he has taken control of his financial situation. Based on 
the available evidence, he is overextended financially because of his failure or inability 
to live within his means. His financial problems are recent, not isolated, and are likely to 
be a concern in the future. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). 
Applicant’s years of working for Government contractors weighs in his favor. He 
is considered a valued employee. Aside from his delinquent debts (which are a civil, 
non-criminal issue), he is a law-abiding citizen, a good father, and loving husband. He 
expressed regrets for his financial mistakes and claimed he is trying to correct them.  
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in his case, including Applicant’s 
age, education, maturity, his years working for the Government contractors, he 
demonstrated a lack of judgment and trustworthiness in the handling of his financial 
affairs. He failed to deal responsibly with his financial obligations, especially after receipt 
of the SOR. His failure or inability to live within his means and to meet his financial 
obligations indicates poor self-control or an unwillingness to abide by rules and 
 
 
9 
 
regulations. His behavior raises questions about his reliability, and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a; 1.c- 1.h;  Against Applicant 
1.j; and 1.l – 1.o: 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b; 1.i; and 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
