1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13073
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline B (Foreign
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
 Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-QIP), on November 10,
2005. On March 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 9, 2008 and requested a hearing
before an administrative judge. In his answer he admitted four (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., d., e.,and
g.) and denied the other five of the nine allegations in the SOR. Department Counsel
was prepared to proceed on May 22, 2008. I received the case assignment on May 27,
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 6, 2008, for a hearing on June 16,
2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered two exhibits (Exhs 1 and 2) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. The government also offered two additional
exhibits (Exhs. 3 and 4) in rebuttal to Applicant’s testimony and they were admitted.
Applicant submitted ten exhibits (Exhs. A-J) which were admitted without objection. He
testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June
24, 2008.
Procedural Rulings
Notice of Hearing
The hearing notice was dated less than 15 days before the hearing date. I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before
the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated
he was ready to proceed (Tr. 9).
Administrative Notice
The government requested that administrative notice be taken of seven official
U.S. government documents relating to Afghanistan and security concerns of the U.S.
arising from terrorism. With no objection from Applicant, the documents were accepted
for notice. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old Afghan male who has an offer of employment from a
government contractor to provide services as a translator for the U.S. military in
Afghanistan. He now works as a production manager for a private company where he
supervises 45 employees. 
Applicant came to the U.S. in 1989 when he was 18 years old with his family. He
emigrated from Pakistan where he had been in a school since 1987 sponsored by the
U.S. government for children of Afghan forces working against the occupation by the
former Soviet Union. He became a U.S. citizen in 2002.
Applicant has several relatives living in Afghanistan or with familial connections
there. His wife lives in the U.S. but is a citizen of Afghanistan. She recently has applied
for U.S. citizenship. (SOR ¶ 1.a.). She has several family members residing there
including two underage siblings. She maintains contact with her parents and other
3
relatives on a regular basis. Applicant’s mother was a citizen of Afghanistan but is now
a U.S. citizen residing in the U.S. with him (SOR¶ 1.b.). He has contacts with his wife’s
relatives but less frequently than she. 
Applicant’s father is a professor with a Ph.D degree who emigrated to the U.S. in
the mid 1980's and taught a medical subject at a U.S. university. He was active in
Afghanistan fighting against the Soviets and returned to Afghanistan in 2002 after the
collapse of the Taliban. He left his family in the U.S., remarried, and now teaches at an
Afghan university (SOR¶ 1.c.). Applicant and others in the family are not on good terms
with him and have little contact with him.
Applicant’s mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens of and residing in
Afghanistan where they teach lower grades in a school. He has three sisters-in-law who
are from Afghanistan. One is a U.S. citizen living in the U.S. The second lives in
Canada and is applying for Canadian citizenship. The third lives in Germany and is
applying for German citizenship. These in-laws are subjects of two allegations (SOR ¶¶
1.d. and 1.e.).
Applicant made two statements to investigators during his security investigation
concerning his friendship or acquaintance with an influential leader who was fighting the
Taliban in Afghanistan. This information was not true, as he has acknowledged (Tr.46).
However, he did not claim to be a relative of the person or involved with his organization
as was alleged. (SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and i.). The person in question was an acquaintance and
colleague of Applicant’s father.
Applicant traveled to Pakistan in 1990 and 1991 to help his sister and her two
children gain visas to the U.S. All three are now U.S. citizens living in the U.S. In 2002
he traveled twice to Pakistan. The first trip was to accompany his sister-in-law for the
funeral of her sister, since her husband could not accompany her. The second trip was
to accompany his wife to the U.S. because she had just received a visa to travel to the
U.S. In 2005 he traveled to Afghanistan to attend the wedding of a sister-in-law and to
explore business opportunities for his present employer who does work in the Middle
East. No business sources were developed. 
Applicant does not have a security clearance but desires one so that he can
return to his country of origin and make a contribution to the U.S. national defense by
working for the U.S. military as a translator for at least one year. His interest in taking
the new job in Afghanistan stems from doing work on two occasions as a translator for
the Army in military exercises in the U.S. in 2007. He did this work while on vacation
from his regular job. He was highly regarded for his work and commended by the
commanding officer of the unit he worked with (Exh. D) and given a citation for his work
with the units (Exh. C). 
Applicant’s wife is studying to be a medical assistant. They have one three-year-
old daughter. His annual salary from his current employment is approximately $60,000.
He is highly regarded by his present employer for his skills and dedication (Exhs. F-J).
4
His salary from his prospective job would be approximately the same as from his
present employment. 
The U.S. military is heavily involved in combating insurgent forces in Afghanistan
and it is an unstable country. Large parts of it are under the control of Taliban
insurgents and it is a dangerous part of the world where there are human rights abuses
and acts of terrorism. The documents that were admitted for administrative notice
describe the situation as it is found there in official U.S. government sources (Exhs. I-
VII). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
5
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate
legal precepts, factors and conditions above, I conclude the following with respect to all
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in
AG ¶ 6: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism
Conditions under Guideline B that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying include contact with a foreign family member who is a citizen of, or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion (AG ¶ 7a). A second condition that could
raise a security concern include connections to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create potential conflict of interest between the individual and desire to help
a foreign person by providing information (AG ¶ 7(b). 
Based on the evidence of record, including Applicant’s acknowledgment of family
members living abroad, and his statement to investigators, the Government established
a basis for concern over foreign influence. The Applicant had the burden to establish
security suitability through evidence which refutes, mitigates, or extenuates the
disqualification and demonstrates that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant a security clearance. ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
6
Mitigating conditions (MC) that might be applicable are a determination that the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which the persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual group or government and the interests of the U.S. (AG ¶
8a). A second possible MC is if the contacts with foreign persons is so infrequent to be
deemed casual (AG ¶ 8c). However, by virtue of the close relationships of the foreign
family members, Applicant’s contacts, though infrequent, cannot be deemed casual.
Also, if the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the
U.S.,that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. (AG ¶
8b).
The fact that some relatives live in Afghanistan, and the history of that country as
to military activities makes it a heightened security risk. U.S. troops are fighting Taliban
forces in Afghanistan. They need translators for their operations and Applicant seeks to
offer a service. He has performed such services well in the military exercises in which he
participated as concluded by the commander of the unit with which he served. 
However, the fact that he exaggerated contacts with a significant Afghan leader
who was helping U.S. forces, and the fact that he wants the clearance to work possibly
for only one year creates some security concern that is not overcome by his desire to
serve his country. While it is commendable that he wants to serve the military in a
needed capacity, it is not clear to me that his motivation is sufficiently strong as to
overcome the security issues raised by the fact that he has close relatives who live in
Afghanistan. The travels are of lesser concern. His service as a translator for the U.S.
government could well be performed in the U.S. for agencies that need the service here
without the risk of sending him to a country where family members reside. The mitigating
conditions are not applicable to the facts as presented by Applicant. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case. The security concerns do not arise because of any
misconduct by Applicant but solely because of the family members living in a country
with security concerns. While his motivation for seeking a security clearance is
commendable, his exaggeration to the investigator and his desire to perform work
abroad for possibly only a short period leaves doubts as to the wisdom of granting a
clearance in these circumstances. 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from these issues of
foreign influence.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:  For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is denied. 
___________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
