                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15699 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on June 1, 2007 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F.  
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 31, 2008, and requested determination 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
written case on May 21, 2008. On May 28, 2008, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on June 2, 2008, and he did not respond. The 
case was assigned to me on August 15, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.d through 1.r. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old senior designer for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since January 2003. He served on active duty in the 
U.S. Air Force from October 1978 to October 1984 and was separated with a general 
discharge under honorable conditions (GX 4 at 24-25). He received a security clearance 
in December 1991 (GX 4 at 29). 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in March 2002 and received a 
discharge in July 2002 (GX 5). The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The financial 
problems leading to this bankruptcy arose when Applicant’s wife underwent surgery that 
was not covered by insurance, and Applicant was laid off from his job at about the same 
time. He returned to work in January 2003 at half his previous pay (Answer to SOR). 
 
 After his bankruptcy discharge, Applicant again began accumulating new 
delinquent debts. The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts totaling about $11,727. The 
largest debt is for $3,998 on a delinquent car loan (SOR ¶ 1.c). Three are for less than 
$100 (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.m and 1.n). The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.r are for $137 
and $124 respectively. 
 
Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He stated he paid off the debt in 
March 2005, but he could not produce any documentation that the debt was satisfied.  
 
 Applicant denied the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, the largest debt alleged. In 
his answer to the SOR, he claimed this debt was discharged in his Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The judgment predated the bankruptcy petition, and the creditor who 
obtained the judgment was listed in the schedule of creditors and received a copy of the 
discharge order (GX 5).  
 
 Applicant’s spouse has multiple ongoing medical problems, and Applicant suffers 
from hypertension. The two of them take a total of 15 prescribed medications, incurring 
uninsured copayments of $20 for each medication. His spouse averages three doctor 
visits per month, incurring a copayment of $40 for each visit. Applicant’s net monthly 
income is about $2,400 per month, and his expenses are about $1,950, leaving a net 
remainder of about $450 for debt repayment (Answer at 2). 
 3
 
 In March 2007, Applicant received a $6,000 check from a source not reflected in 
the record, and he used the money to pay off a car loan. When the check was 
dishonored, he was required to repay the bank at a rate of $350 per month. The 
dishonored check is now paid off (GX 9 at 5).  
 
 Applicant states he is unable to afford the monthly payments of $250 to $300 his 
creditors have offered. His plan is to pay off one small debt each month and save 
money each month until he has enough to pay off one of the larger debts in full (Answer 
at 1). His answer to the SOR outlining his plan was submitted in March 2008, and he 
received the FORM in June 2008, but he did not submit any evidence in response to the 
FORM to show that any of the smaller debts had been paid. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 4
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Two potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this 
case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ 
AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ 
Applicant’s financial history establishes both of these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Several mitigating conditions are relevant to this case. Security concerns based 
on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that Athe behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 5
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent) are not 
established because Applicant has numerous debts that are not yet resolved. The third 
prong (unusual circumstances not likely to recur) is established, because his financial 
problems were aggravated by the dishonored check that was uttered to him. The final 
prong is not established because Applicant has not established a track record of timely 
payment of debts. The bad check has been resolved, but Applicant has not 
demonstrated that he is now carrying out his plan of paying off one small debt each 
month. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant encountered 
several conditions beyond his control: loss of his job, reemployment at half his previous 
pay, the bad check, and recurring health problems for himself and his spouse. 
Applicant’s bankruptcy petition in 2002 was a reasonable and prudent response to his 
loss of employment and unexpected medical expenses that were not covered by 
insurance. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He has not demonstrated reasonable conduct concerning the 
delinquent debts that he accumulated after his bankruptcy, because he has not 
demonstrated that he is carrying out his plan to eliminate some of his smaller debts, 
even though he apparently has the financial means to do so. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received 
counseling and the problem is not under control 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
This condition is not established because Applicant has not demonstrated that he is 
carrying out his plan to resolve his debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He was able to document the 
resolution of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he provided no documentation for his dispute 
 6
regarding SOR ¶ 1.b. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established only for the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has encountered numerous financial challenges. 
In his answer to the SOR, he articulated a good grasp of his financial situation and a 
reasonable plan to resolve his delinquent debts. He has failed, however, to demonstrate 
that he is carrying out his plan.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.r:    Against Applicant 
 7
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
 
