 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18545 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on June 22, 2006. On March 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 15, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 16, 2008. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on May 21, 2008. The case was 
transferred to me on June 4, 2008. On June 6, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued, 
scheduling the hearing for July 16, 2008. The case was heard on that date. The 
Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 
– 4. The Applicant offered one exhibit which was admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant also testified. The transcript was received on July 23, 2008.  Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.e, but denies the allegations in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with his company since 
September 2005. He served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 
2001 to September 2005. He separated at the rank of E-5. He recently married in 
January 2008. He and his current wife have an eight-month-old daughter. He has a two 
sons, ages six and three, from a prior marriage, and a six-year-old daughter from a prior 
relationship. (Tr at 5, 24-25, 74; Gov 1.)  
 
On June 22, 2006, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security  
Position, (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. He answered “No” in 
response to question 28(a) “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent 
on any debt(s)?” He also answered “No” in response to question 28(b) “Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He answered, “Yes” in response to 
question 28(b) “In the last 7 years, have you had your wages garnished or had any 
property repossessed for any reason?” He listed a $10,487 garnishment for past child 
support. (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:  a $17,071 judgment entered in August 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 
1); a $12,742 balance on an automobile loan placed for collection in November 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 2); a $487 credit card account charged off as a bad debt in 
December 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 1); a $5,216 credit union loan charged 
off as a bad debt in August 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 5; Gov 4 at 2); and a delinquent 
child support account with an approximate balance of $7,986 (SOR ¶ 1.e; Gov 3 at 2; 
Gov 4 at 1). 
 
In an undated response to interrogatories, Applicant indicated that he could not 
afford to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, and that he will seek financial 
counseling. He provided a copy of the child support orders issued against him, and 
copies of his paycheck statement for January 20, 2008 and February 8, 2008. His net 
pay after deductions including child support is $344.41. He is paid bi-weekly. (Gov 2.) 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that his financial finances became a problem after 
his divorce. He and his first wife divorced in April 2007. His ex-wife ran up the credit 
card balance. He does not want to pursue action against her because it would hurt his 
two sons financially. The amount of delinquent child support is high because he was not 
 
3 
 
 
aware of the existence of his oldest daughter until she was four-years-old. He is paying 
child support for all of his children. (Tr at 17 -19.) 
 
Applicant states that he did not intentionally falsify his security clearance 
questionnaire. He claims he left the questionnaire blank and was going to answer it 
later. He alleges that a women who worked in the security office at the time, changed 
the questionnaire to indicate that he answered “No.”  He had nothing to corroborate this 
assertion. The woman is no longer employed with the company. (Tr at 17, 29-33  ) 
 
Applicant pays $325 per month for his oldest daughter. He pays $802 per month 
for his two sons. (Tr at 51.) He provided a copy of two recent pay statements dated July 
11, 2008, and June 28, 2008.  His net pay after his deductions including child support is 
$337.05 every two weeks which is approximately $674.10 per month. (Tr. at 41; AE A.) 
Aside from paying for child support, Applicant has not attempted to resolve the 
delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d. (Tr at 50.) He claims the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is the same debt that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr at 49.)   
 
Applicant and his new wife intend to establish a budget and attend financial 
counseling. He was waiting for the outcome of his security clearance investigation to 
attend financial counseling.  His new wife owns a home and is a GS-12 with the federal 
government. He has two step-children, a girl, age 16, and a boy, age 14. (Tr at 42-45, 
52.)   
  
Applicant has been handling classified information since he was on active duty in 
the United States Navy. He would never accept money in return for taking negative 
action against the government. (Tr at 21.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has five delinquent accounts 
with the total approximate balance of $43,393. Of that amount, $7,986 relates to past 
 
5 
 
 
due child support. There is a possibility that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are 
the same account. However, the credit reports in the record do not provide enough 
information to confirm they are the same account. Applicant did not provide 
documentation that would verify that they are the same account. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility is too recent to apply this mitigating 
condition. Although Applicant is paying child support for his children, he took no steps to 
resolve the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d. It is unlikely he will be able 
to resolve these accounts based on the amount of take home pay he receives after his 
child support is deducted.    
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Although Applicant’s recent 
divorce adversely affected his finances, I cannot conclude that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances because he took minimal action towards resolving his 
delinquent accounts.   
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. He intends to 
do so in the future. His financial problems remain due to his inability to pay his 
delinquent accounts.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to Applicant’s child support 
obligations (SOR ¶ 1.e). He is making regular payments towards his child support 
obligations. However, he has not taken steps towards resolving the remaining 
delinquent accounts.   
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d in response to questions 28(a) and 
28(b) on his security clearance questionnaire, dated June 22, 2006. There is 
circumstantial evidence to support the premise that these two accounts were more than 
90 days delinquent at the time Applicant responded to question 28(b), and should have 
been entered in response to question 28(b). There is circumstantial evidence to support 
the premise that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was more than 180 days delinquent, and 
should have been entered in response to question 28(a.) The following Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) potentially applies to Applicant’s case. 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities). Applicant claims that he left the answers to these questions blank and 
an employee in the security office changed his answers to “No.”  I do not find this 
explanation credible. At the end of the security clearance questionnaire, there is a 
section titled, “Additional Comments.” Applicant had the opportunity to indicate that he 
might have delinquent debts in this section. While I would like to give Applicant the 
benefit of the doubt, his explanation was too implausible absent some corroboration.  
 
 None of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Concerns (PC MC) apply. I find against  
Applicant under the Personal Conduct concern. 
    
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active 
 
7 
 
 
service in the United States Navy. I considered that Applicant’s divorce adversely 
affected his financial situation. I considered that Applicant is dutifully making his child 
support payments. However, questions remain under the financial considerations 
concern due to Applicant’s failure to take action towards resolving his remaining 
delinquent accounts. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations. Concerns are raised about Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability 
under personal conduct due to his omission of delinquent debts on his security 
clearance questionnaire, and his implausible explanation for the omission during the 
hearing.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
