                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15140 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has two delinquent debts and two unpaid tax liens totaling in excess of 
$16,000. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 16, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
  
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
 On April 14, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 30, 2008. Applicant was sent a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. The FORM was 
received on June 12, 2008. Applicant's response to the FORM was due 30 days after 
receipt of a copy of the FORM. As of August 12, 2008, no response had been received. 
On August 15, 2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing the debts in ¶1a, 1b, 1c, and 
1d, with explanation. He denied intentionally providing a false answer to question 27 of 
his security questionnaire relating to reporting of tax liens. Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old who has worked for a defense contractor since 
February 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
Applicant acknowledged two medical debts and two tax liens totaling $16,678. 
Applicant asserted he is making $25 per month payments on one medical debt (SOR ¶ 
1.b). (Item 6) He provided documentation showing he made a $25 payment in 
December 2007 and a second in January 2008. The debt was $340 when he answered 
the SOR. (Item 4) Applicant asserted he is making similar payments on the medical 
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. He provided documentation showing two payments, the last 
occurring in January 2008. As of his response to the SOR, he had reduced the debt to 
$5,807. (Item 4) This debt was incurred in 2004 when Applicant was unemployed and 
became ill resulting in hospitalization. There is no documentation Applicant has made 
additional payments on any of his debts. 
 
Accompanying his answer to the SOR (Item 4), Applicant provided 
documentation that he had paid other medical debts not listed in the SOR. As of 
February 2008, Applicant’s monthly discretionary income (gross income less monthly 
expenses) was $2,000. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant admits owing the IRS $9,650 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and the state department of 
revenue $806 (SOR ¶ 1.d). In September 2000, the IRS issued a tax lien (Item 7) and in 
August 1999, the state issued a tax lien. (Item 7) In August 2006, Applicant completed 
an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 5) He 
answered “no” to section 27, which asked if during the previous seven years he had a 
lien placed against his property for failing to pay taxes or other debts. Applicant asserts 
he “was unaware of any tax liens appearing on [his] credit record” (Item 4) when he 
completed his e-QIP. He assets he did not intentionally provide false information.  
 
In his response to the SOR (Item 4), Applicant stated he would investigate the 
tax liens and arrange repayment of the debts. In February 2008, Applicant responded to 
written interrogatories (Item 6). At that time, Applicant stated he had talked with an IRS 
 
 
 
3
agent and was told the IRS records did not show the lien. The agent stated liens do not 
appear after 15 years. Applicant asserts the agent stated he would provide Applicant 
with forms to apply for a manual release of the lien. No documentation supporting his 
assertions was received. 
 
The tax liens were filed in 1999 (Item 7) less than ten years before Applicant 
talked with the IRS and seven years before Applicant completed his e-QIP.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
4
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed approximately $16,800 on four past due obligations including 
two tax liens. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, his 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, his SOR 
response, and his response to interrogatories. Throughout this process, he had 
admitted responsibility for four delinquent debs, totaling more than $16,000. These 
debts are currently delinquent. He has provided insufficient documentation to show 
significant progress resolving these debts. He documented making four payments 
totaling $100. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19 (c). 
 
 
 
 
5
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s one medical debt occurred when he was sick and 
hospitalized in 2004, while unemployed. Illness is not an event that is unlikely to recur. 
There is no showing the tax liens were not caused by sickness. The debts remain 
unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experience illness and hospitalization while 
unemployed. His illness occurred four years ago. AG & 20(b) has some applicability.  
 
Under AG & 20(c), there is no showing Applicant has attended financial classes, 
maintains a budget, or is paying his debts. AG & 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(d), Applicant asserts he is making monthly payments on two 
debts, but only documented making four $25 payments in December 2006 and January 
2007. No other payments are shown. Evidence of a good-faith plan is lacking. Applicant 
asserts he owes no past due taxes. However, he again failed to provide supporting 
documents. He talked with the IRS, but provided no evidence he discussed the state tax 
lien with state authorities. Tax liens may not appear after 15 years, but Applicant’s lien 
is only nine years old. He has failed to show the tax liens have been released or that no 
tax is owed. AG & 20(d) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Personal Conduct  
 
 The Directive sets out various factors relevant to an applicant=s personal conduct 
that may be potentially disqualifying. Paragraph 15 of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
states a concern where there is conduct “involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.” 
 
 Under AG &16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities” and AG &16(b) “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative” 
 
 Applicant=s false answer on his SF 86 about his tax liens tends to show 
questionable judgment, unreliability, and lack of trustworthiness. AG &16(a) and AG 
&16(b) apply. 
 
 Applicant asserts he was unaware of any tax liens and did not intentionally 
provide false information. Tax liens are routinely imposed only after a person is notified 
of the tax obligations and provided an opportunity to respond. Additionally, Applicant 
knew he was delinquent on almost $6,000 of medical debt resulting from his 2004 
illness and hospitalization. He failed to report his delinquent medical debt on his e-QIP 
does not strengthen his claim of mistake. Due to the significant nature of the debt he 
should have been aware of the debts when completing his e-QIP. 
 
 Because Applicant chose to have his security clearance eligibility addressed 
without a hearing, I am unable to give additional weight to his credibility. Applicant failed 
to present a good explanation as to why he did not answer the questions correctly.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns. Mitigation could occur under AG ¶ 17(a) if a person “provides the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant has not met his burden of proving that 
he made good-faith efforts to correct the omissions in his security clearance application 
or that his efforts were prompt. I find this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 (c) provides mitigation where “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security clearance application in issue 
 
 
 
7
was executed in August 2006, which is recent. I conclude this potentially mitigating 
condition does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 (f) provides mitigation where “the information was unsubstantiated or 
from a source of questionable reliability.” Applicant=s tax liens are substantiated by his 
admissions and Item 7. Also, the information was pertinent to a determination of his 
debts and finances. I find this mitigating factor does not apply. I also considered 
carefully the other potentially mitigating conditions and conclude they do not apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. His medical debts are not the type of 
debt that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. However, Applicant did not explain how or why the tax liens were 
incurred. Applicant asserts he was unaware of his tax liens and did not falsify his 
questionnaire. Outstanding tax liens are a type of obligations an applicant is expected to 
remember and report on his e-QIP.  
 
Applicant has $2,000 per month in discretionary income, but has shown payment 
of only $100 on his debts. Paying $100 on his outstanding obligations is insufficient to 
show rehabilitation, a permanent change of behavior, or the likelihood the debts will not 
continue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
