                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-18173
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 20, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on January 2, 2007.  On April 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on May 17, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to another
Administrative Judge on June 18, 2008.  It was later transferred and assigned to the
undersigned Administrative Judge on July 7, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued on
July 8, 2008, scheduling the hearing for August 6, 2008.  At the hearing the Government
presented two exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2.  The Applicant
presented ten exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through J.  He also testified
on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on August 14, 2008.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Bangladesh.  Applicant had
no objection.  (Tr. p. 18).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted
into evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set
out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 38 years of age, married and has a
Master’s Degree in Communication Theory.  He is employed as an Electrical Engineer
for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Dhaka, Bangladesh in 1969.  He came to the United
States on an F-1 student visa in August 1991, to pursue a college degree.  He became
a naturalized United States citizen in February 2006.  In May or June 1997, he returned
to Bangladesh to meet the woman he was arranged to marry, and returned to
Bangladesh later that year, in December 1997, to get married.  His wife came to the
United States in 1997, and she became a naturalized citizen in 2005.  He began
working for his current employer in October 2006, completed a security clearance
application on January 2, 2007, wherein he indicated that he was a dual citizen of
Bangladesh and the United States.  (Government Exhibit 1, p. 8).  He updated his form
later to indicate his dual citizenship had expired along with his Bangladeshi passport.   
The Applicant’s parents and in-laws are citizens and residents of Bangladesh.
The Applicant has traveled to Bangladesh two times  in 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001,
2002, 2004 and 2005.  His trips to Bangladesh to see his family from 1998 through 2000
were with the permission of his company.  In 2001, his trip was for business purposes
only.  His trips to Bangladesh in 2004 and 2005 were to visit his family there.  On most
of his trips to Bangladesh his wife travels with him so that she can visit her parents there
too. He plans to again travel to Bangladesh at the end of 2008 or the beginning of 2009.
When the Applicant visits his family in Bangladesh he brings gifts of chocolates,
souvenirs, books and golf items for his father.  The Applicant also has a sister who is a
financial analyst and resides in Canada.  
He considers himself “close” to and maintains regular communication with, his
mother, father and in-laws in Bangladesh.  He communicates with his mother and father
about once a week or every other week.  (Tr. p. 46).  His father is a retired Brigadier
General in the Bangladesh Army after twenty five or thirty years of service.  Growing up,
the Applicant’s father never discussed his work with the Applicant so that Applicant is
3
not aware of whether he is still affiliated with any military organization.  (Tr. p. 51).  He
does know that he is now a newspaper journalist for the local paper in Bangladesh.        
  
The Applicant’s mother-in-law is a teacher or Vice Principal of a private school in
Bangladesh.  She is currently considering her options to relocate to the United States.
Since the early part of 2008, when she separated from her husband, the Applicant has
sent his mother-in-law approximately $300.00 a month to help provide for her support.
The Applicant speaks with his mother-in-law about once a month or so.  His wife speaks
with her mother more frequently, about a couple of times a week.  His father-in-law is a
retired executive of an electric company and is supported by his properties.  He also
served in the Bangladesh military and was a Lieutenant Colonel and a civil engineer
before he retired.  The Applicant’s wife has one sister who lives in Canada but is
spending the summer in Bangladesh.  She speaks to her a couple of times a week.  (Tr.
P. 61).  Her brother is an artist who lives in Bangladesh.  
The Applicant has a small bank account in Bangladesh for purposes of
exchanging money from the United States to Bangladesh.  (Tr. p. 62).
The Applicant does not own a home in the United States.  He owns a car and
has some money in retirement accounts worth approximately $120,000.00.  (Tr. p. 63).  
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s Director of Human Resources
and long time friend attest to his frequent relocations for his company, including
Minnesota, Nebraska, and then travel abroad for his company to Australia and
Singapore in mid 2001.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B, C, D, E and F).  
      
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in
Bangladesh.  Bangladesh obtained its independence from Pakistan in 1971 and
pursuant to its constitution of 1972, it became a parliamentary democracy.  Relations
with Bangladesh and the United States are excellent and Bangladesh has become a
valuable United States ally in the Global War on Terrorism.  However, its human rights
record has worsened over the years.  Extra-judicial killings, arbitrary arrest and
detention, physical and psychological torture by security forces and politically motivated
violence has become more prevalent.  Although prohibited by law, security forces and
police have frequently employed severe treatment as well as psychological abuse
during arrests and interrogations.  The United States Department of State advises
United States citizens against traveling to certain areas in Bangladesh because of the
violence from members of banned terrorist groups that surface in the area.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
4
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
7.  (d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
5
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign connections may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the
Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the United States paramount to
that of another nation. The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
6
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
The Applicant, on his security clearance application, initially indicated that he is a
dual citizen of Bangladesh and the United States.  It is undisputed that he has
significant family ties in Bangladesh, and there is strong evidence of a close bond and
affection with his family in Bangladesh.  His mother, father, mother-in-law and father-in-
law are all citizens of and reside in Bangladesh.  He maintains close and continuing
contact with them, that ranges from about once a week to about once a month
depending on who they are.  Although he has been in the United States since 1991, he
only became a United States citizen in 2006, just two years ago.  He has traveled to
Bangladesh extensively, and plans to go back again to visit his family in the near future.
He has not cut all ties from Bangladesh.    
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and 7(d) sharing
living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion apply.  None of the mitigation conditions apply. 
It is noted that the current political situation in Bangladesh elevates the cause for
concern in this case.  Although there is no direct evidence that his family members in
Bangladesh are associated in any way with the Bangladesh government, there is
evidence of a close bond and strong evidence of affection with his immediate family in
Bangladesh. This bond and affection with his family could potentially cause the
Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion.  Therefore, the possibility of foreign influence exists that could create the
potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I find that the
Applicant is vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.c.: Against the Applicant
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
