                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02818 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 30, 2008 and May 9, 2008. She 
elected to have her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted 
the government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on June 12, 2008. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
sent to Applicant by mail and it was received on June 17, 2008. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. 
The case was assigned to me on August 15, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with qualifiers. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was married 
from 1995 to 1998 and 1981 to 1991 and divorced twice. She has two grown children, 
ages 37 and 29. 
 
 Applicant has 33 delinquent accounts totally approximately $6,800. In answering 
each allegation she stated “I agree but to the extent.” She did not elaborate on what “to 
the extent” actually means. She did not provide any proof of payment or resolution 
toward any of the accounts. The accounts have been referred for collection or charged 
off between one and six years ago. It appears some of the debts are for medical bills, 
but no explanation was provided. She did make the following statement in the section 
“Additional Comments” of her security clearance application (SCA): “There is a Worker’s 
Comp case still pending for an injury that occurred when I was employed at [Company]. 
I have not been billed for treatment because the case has not yet been resolved, so no 
payment has been made yet.” Applicant failed to further elaborate on the status of the 
medical bills alleged.  
 
 Applicant also has a federal tax lien in the amount of approximately $35,000 that 
was entered against her in April 2003. In response to the allegation she stated “When 
the lady came to ask me questions I told her she ask[ed] me something about the IRS 
and I told her I paid $10,000 and have been keeping my income tax each year that was 
the last I heard.” It is unclear exactly what this explanation means, but it does indicate 
Applicant was aware of a debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). She did not 
provide proof that she paid $10,000 to the IRS, has a payment plan or that the tax lien 
has been satisfied.  
 
 Applicant responded “no” to inquiries on her SCA when asked is she had debts in 
the last seven years that were over 180 days overdue, and if she had debts that were 
currently 90 days overdue. She also answered “no” to an inquiry on her SCA asking if in 
the last seven years she had a lien placed on her property for failing to pay taxes or 
other debts.1 Her response for why she failed to accurately reflect her financial situation 
was that she did not remember the questions, she tried to answer everything “the best 
she could,” she had never filled out any of the papers for a job before, and had 
everything messed up. She further stated that she is now attempting to get a credit 
1 Item 6, Quesitons 27 (c) and 28 (a) and (b).  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
report so she can contact the creditors.2 It is simply not believable that Applicant did not 
know that she had any delinquent debts or that she had a tax lien. Applicant has 21 
delinquent debts for medical accounts. Four of the other delinquent debts are to four 
different telephone service companies. One delinquent debt is for cable services. One 
delinquent debt is for Direct TV. It appears four delinquent debts are for some type of 
utilities. One delinquent debt is to a cash store, presumably for a short term loan. Under 
the circumstances of these facts, I find it inconceivable that Applicant was unaware that 
she had any delinquent debts. She mentions paying on an IRS debt, which gives 
credence to the fact she was aware that one existed. I find Applicant intentionally and 
deliberately falsified information on his SCA by failing to divulge her financial 
delinquencies.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
2 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
“Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 for financial 
considerations that could raise a security concern and have especially considered AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that have remained 
unpaid for several years. She admitted she owes the delinquent debts. No information 
was provided that she has paid the debts or attempted to resolve them. I find both AG ¶ 
19 (a) and (c) apply. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and especially considered (a) 
(“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”), (b) (“the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances”), (c) (“the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
 
5 
 
 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”), (d) (“the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”), and 
(e) (“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”).  
Applicant failed to provide any information about any of the delinquent debts. 
Although many of them appear to be medical debts she did not provide information as 
to why they were beyond her control or that she acted responsibly toward them. She 
also alluded to having some type of worker’s compensation claim, but again failed to 
provide any amplifying information as to when she suffered an injury and if the debts 
listed are even related to the medical issue. Even if the medical debts were beyond her 
control she still has a number of other delinquent debts that she has not addressed. I 
find Applicant has failed to raise any of the mitigating conditions.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”  
I have considered all of the personal conduct disqualifying under AG ¶ 16 and 
especially considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities”). Applicant alludes in her answer that she answered the 
questions on her SCA honestly. I do not find these statements credible. Applicant has 
34 debts; some are for medical services, others for utilities and other expenses. She 
owes a tax debt of $35,000. It is inconceivable that she would be totally unaware that 
she had any debts past due 90 days or delinquent for more than 180 days. She stated 
she has paid the IRS $10,000. It is clear she knew she owed a substantial debt to the 
IRS. She claims she made a payment, although she failed to provide proof of it. Some 
of Applicant’s delinquent debts are several years old and others are not. I find Applicant 
intentionally and deliberately falsified information on her SCA by not listing any of her 
delinquent debts or that she had a delinquent tax debt.  
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17. I have especially considered (a) (“the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts”) and (c) (“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
6 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”).  
Applicant did not promptly report her omissions before being confronted with 
them. Her finances are a serious security concern and the intentional concealment of 
them creates an elevated concern. This omission is not minor and the circumstances 
were not unique. Applicant had 34 delinquent debts, one of which was a tax lien. The 
SCA specifically asked her about her delinquent debts and she denied she had any. Her 
actions cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I find none of 
the mitigating conditions apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 57 years old. She has 
numerous delinquent debts and failed to provide any information that she has attempted 
to pay or resolve any of them. In addition, she intentionally failed to divulge her 
delinquent debts on her SCA. She has not presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns raised. Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from the 
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.ah:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
