 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01351 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) Questionnaire on August 10, 2007. On May 22, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 In an undated document, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 
18, 2008. I convened a hearing on August 4, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced three exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 3 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses.  He did not introduce exhibits.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open for one week, until close of 
business August 11, 2008, so that Applicant could provide additional information for the 
record.  Applicant did not file any additional information, and I closed the record on 
August 12, 2008.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on August 12, 2008. 
 
                                          Procedural Matters 
 
Applicant was apprised of the 15-day notice provision specified in Enclosure 3, ¶ 
E3.1.8.  He voluntarily and knowingly elected to waive the 15-day notice provision in 
order to appear earlier for his hearing.  He stated he understood the effect of the waiver 
should he be the unsuccessful party in this matter and elect to file an appeal. (Tr. 10-
12.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.) and one allegation under AG H, Drug 
Involvement (SOR ¶ 2.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three 
allegations under AG E and the one allegation under AG H.  In his Answer, he provided 
additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Answer 
to SOR; Ex. 1; Ex. 3.)  
 
 Applicant was born in July 1989, and, on the date of his hearing, he was 19 years 
old. He has completed one year of university studies and plans to major in Management 
Information Systems.  He is unmarried and resides with his parents when he is not 
pursuing his university studies.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 5-6, 22-23.) 
 
 While he was a high school student and before leaving to attend a university in 
another state, Applicant was employed as a laptop administrator by a federal contractor. 
Applicant’s father was also employed by the federal contractor and was Applicant’s 
supervisor.  Applicant stated his father wanted him to work for the federal contractor so 
he could gain experience in computer technology. Applicant began his employment with 
the federal contractor in May 2006, when he was sixteen years old. (Ex. 1; Tr. 24-25, 
38.) 
  
 Applicant used marijuana once when he was fifteen years old and in the 10th 
grade in high school. He used marijuana for the second time when he was sixteen years 
old and in the 11th grade of high school.  Between the ages of 16 and 18, Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
used marijuana about every three or four months.  His last use of marijuana occurred in 
September 2007, when he was a college freshman.  Applicant claims he has not used 
marijuana since September 2007. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Tr. 46-56.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were both in the military, and the family moved often.  
Applicant stated that when he was 16, 17, and 18, he felt like an outcast.  He explained 
his drug use in part by stating that he tried very hard to fit in with other young people his 
age.  (Tr. 52-54.) 
 
 At his father’s suggestion, Applicant completed an e-QIP application for a 
security clearance sometime in the summer of 2005, when he was still 15 years old.1  
He signed the application electronically and printed it, but he did not file it with a security 
officer.  He testified he kept it in a file he had at home. (Tr. 29-30, 50-51, 58-59.) 
 
 Question 24a on the e-QIP reads: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Question 24b on the e-QIP reads: 
 
Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a 
law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official, while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety? 
 
Question 24c reads: 
 
In the last 7 years, have you been involved in the illegal purchase, 
manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, or sale 
of any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen, or cannabis for your 
own intended profit or that of another? 
 
 By the time he completed the e-QIP in the summer of 2005, Applicant had used 
marijuana. However, he interpreted Question 24a to apply only to individuals who were 
16 years of age or older. Since he was not yet 16, he responded “no” to Question 24a, 
thereby denying any illegal drug use.  He also answered “no” to Questions 24b and 24c. 
The record does not reflect that Applicant held a security clearance when he used 
marijuana. At his hearing, Applicant denied purchasing marijuana or contributing to its 
purchase.  (Tr. 31, 34-35.) 
 
                                            
1 Applicant turned 16 in the third week of July 2005. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant completed and certified another e-QIP in August 2007.  He again 
answered “no” to Questions 24a, 24b, and 24c. He did not update his response to 
Question 24a to reflect his behavior with drugs since 2005. He testified that he 
answered “no” on his 2007 e-QIP because he was using his 2005 e-QIP for reference 
and, without being aware of the nature of the questions, simply repeated his 2005 
responses.  (Tr. 26-32.) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant again used marijuana. He did not admit any of his 
marijuana use until interviewed by an authorized investigator in November 2007. 
Applicant stated he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future.  He said he used 
illegal drugs in the past because he was influenced by peer pressure. He stated that 
since September 2007, he was spending time on sports activities and his studies and 
was avoiding venues where drugs were used.  (Ex. 3; Tr. 32-34, 39-41, 554-56.)   
 
 Applicant told his parents about his illegal drug use in the spring of 2008. He said 
he would provide a copy of his 2005 e-QIP for the record, but he failed to do so.  (Tr. 
50-52, 57.) 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
When Appellant answered “no” to Question 24a on the e-QIP that he signed and 
certified in August 2007, he had been using marijuana, an illegal drug, for about four 
years. Approximately one month after completing and certifying his e-QIP, Applicant 
used marijuana again. In his interview with an authorized investigator in November 
2007, he admitted his drug use. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted falsifying 
material facts in his answer to Question 24a. This information raises security concerns 
under AG ¶ 16(a) and AG ¶ 16(e)(1).  
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
 
6 
 
 
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”  
 
I have carefully reviewed all the applicable Guideline E mitigating conditions, and 
I have especially reviewed AG ¶ 17(a) and AG ¶ 17(e).  AG 17(a) reads: “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.” AG 17(e) reads: “the individual has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress.” Applicant falsified his answer to Question 24a on the e-QIP he signed and 
certified on August 10, 2007. He did not make a prompt good-faith attempt to correct the 
falsification. The falsification was brought to his attention in his security interview in 
November 2007. While Applicant claims he has stopped using marijuana, increased his 
sports activities, and sharpened his focus on his university studies, it is not clear that 
these recent actions, while positive, will reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  I conclude that AG ¶17(a) does not apply to the 
facts of Applicant’s case.  I also conclude that AG 17(e) applies only in part. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24(a), defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.”  The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The relevant Guideline H security concern in this case is referenced at AG ¶ 
25(a) of the Drug Involvement guideline.  The record shows that Applicant’s admitted 
illegal marijuana use began in about 2004, when he was 15 years old and continued 
until 2007, when he was 18 years old.  He used illegal drugs while employed by a 
federal contractor and after applying for a security clearance. This conduct casts doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  It also raises security concerns 
about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  I conclude 
that Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns under Guideline H. 
 
Several Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation.  If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used, abstaining from drug use for an 
 
7 
 
 
appropriate period, or signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
The record shows that Applicant’s drug use is recent: it began when he was in 
high school and continued into his first year as a university student.  While Applicant 
stated he had not used marijuana since September 2007, he failed to provide evidence 
corroborating his statement that his abstinence would continue. Applicant stated he had 
changed his behavior and activities after his last use of marijuana in September 2007 
and his subsequent decision to abstain from illegal drugs. However, these decisions are 
recent and of insufficient duration to demonstrate a positive and permanent change in 
behavior. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply in mitigation to the 
security concerns raised by the facts in Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young and immature 
person. He admitted marijuana use that began when he was a teen-ager and continued 
while he was a college student. He was concerned about being accepted by his peers, 
and he attributed his drug use to peer pressure. His explanation for his failure to 
delineate his drug use on the e-QIP he executed and certified in August 2007 was not 
credible. Applicant failed to demonstrate that his illegal conduct was unlikely to recur.   
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance.  In all adjudications, the protection of our national 
security is the paramount concern.  Security clearance decisions are not intended to 
assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past transgressions.  Rather, the 
objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, common sense 
 
8 
 
 
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified 
information.  Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person 
by the totality of his acts and omissions, including all disqualifying and mitigating 
conduct. Having done so, and giving full consideration to the nature of Applicant’s 
conduct, I find he does not merit a security clearance.  In reaching my decision, I have 
considered the evidence as a whole, including the appropriate factors and guidelines in 
the Directive.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his drug involvement and personal conduct.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
