                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02008 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On June 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 17, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on July 23, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 19, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. They 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and did not submit any documentary 
evidence. One witness testified on Applicant’s behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on August 25, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 22 years old. He attends college full time during the school year and 
works part time for an employer who has contracts with the federal government. During 
the summer he is employed full time. He began his employment in November 2006 and 
was aware he would be recommended for a security clearance. He has attended 
college for four years, but after transferring schools he has only two years of credits. His 
major is Information Systems Technology. He graduated from high school in 2004.1  
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in September 2004 while he was at home for 
vacation from college. From September 2004 through 2005 he used marijuana with 
varying frequency when he came home on school breaks. He did not use it while at 
college. He used it with his friends from high school. He stopped using marijuana in 
December 2005 and resumed in the summer of 2006, again with his high school friends 
while at home. He used it a couple of times a week during this period. In August 2006 
he moved away from home and attended a different college. He continued his 
marijuana use with varying frequency from December 2006 to March 2007. He used it 
over the Thanksgiving and Christmas holiday periods at his friend’s house, again in 
January 2007 and again over a three-day spring break vacation to visit a high school 
friend. During this three-day period he estimated he used marijuana several times a day 
each day. He stated he has not used marijuana since this trip in March 2007. In 
November and December 2007, on two occasions, during holiday vacations, he has 
been in the presence of others, high school friends, who used marijuana. Applicant has 
also contributed money, with varying frequency, toward the purchase of marijuana. On 
occasion he would go with a friend to purchase marijuana.2  
 
 Applicant started using marijuana because he wanted to try it and see what it 
was like. It made his body and mind “feel good” and different. He used it with friends 
and on one occasion by himself. Applicant was aware that his use and purchase of 
marijuana was illegal. He used it after he knew he would be applying for a security 
clearance.3 
 
1 Tr. 27-36. 
 
2 Tr. 21-23. 
 
3 Tr. 35-37. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant admitted that when he was interviewed by an investigator for his 
security clearance investigation that he told the investigator he was undecided about his 
intention to use marijuana in the future and he would like to use it again. Applicant 
admitted he made the statement, but has since changed his mind about his intention to 
use marijuana in the future. Applicant made the statement in November 2007. 
Sometime in December 2007 or January 2008 he changed his mind after he began 
reflecting on his future and also the impact it had on him obtaining a security clearance. 
He has now changed his mind and does not intend on using marijuana in the future. His 
future career is more important to him. He admitted that he used marijuana after being 
aware that he was being put in for a security clearance.4 
 
 Applicant has never used any other illegal drug other than marijuana. He did 
admit he used his stepmother’s prescription painkiller without her permission on an 
occasion when he had a severe headache. He took four pills, which was more than the 
prescribed dose and had to go to the hospital. He stated he took the four pills by 
accident.5 
 
 Applicant has not seen his high school friends in over a year. He does 
communicate with one regularly that he used marijuana with, by instant messaging (IM) 
on a weekly basis. This person no longer lives in the area, but does come home for 
holidays. Applicant anticipates going home for the Thanksgiving and Christmas 
holidays. He admitted others have used marijuana in his presence on two occasions 
since he stated his intent to abstain.6 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He has been Applicant’s first level 
and second level supervisor during the time he has been employed. He considers 
Applicant to be professional and responsible. He is on time and is reliable. He trusts him 
to get the job done. He was previously unaware of Applicant’s drug use and only 
became aware of it approximately three weeks ago when he was asked to be a witness. 
His opinion about Applicant’s work performance is unchanged, but he admitted his 
personal opinion and respect he had for him is lower now that he knows Applicant’s 
history.7  
 
 Applicant does not believe his prior drug use affects his trustworthiness or 
reliability because he is always at work on time and performs his duties. He believes his 
employer trusts him.8  
 
4 Tr. 20-22, 40-44, 49-50, 58-59. 
 
5 Tr. 59-63. This information is not considered for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered 
when analyzing the whole person.  
 
6 Tr. 37-40, 47. 
 
7 Tr. 67-78. 
 
8 Tr. 50-56. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: “Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
(a) (“any drug abuse”); (c) (“illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia”); and 
(h) (“expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly 
commit to discontinue drug use”). I conclude all of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. Appellant used marijuana from September 2004 to at least March 2007. He 
contributed money towards the purchase of marijuana. He would go occasionally with a 
friend to purchase marijuana. During his interview with an investigator in November 
2007, he admitted he would like to use marijuana again and had not decided definitely 
whether or not he would. He later changed his position and affirmatively declared his 
intention not to use marijuana in the future. I find all of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26 (a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened under 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) and (b) (“a demonstrated intent not to 
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (a) disassociation from drug-using associates 
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation”).  
 
 Applicant’s last drug use was in March 2007, eighteen months ago. Not until 
December 2007 or January 2008, approximately eight months ago, did he make a 
commitment not to use illegal drugs in the future. Applicant regularly communicates with 
at least one of his high school friends with whom he used drugs, although they do not 
live in the same city any longer. Both are from the same hometown and go home for the 
holidays. Applicant used illegal drugs when he would return home and get together with 
his high school friends. Under the circumstances I cannot find that Applicant’s drug use 
was infrequent, as it occurred during a several year period. Nor can I find that it 
happened so far in the past, because his last use was only 18-months ago and while he 
 
6 
 
 
was working for the same employer. I also cannot find that it is unlikely to recur. It 
appears that Applicant’s pattern is to use drugs when he returns home and/or visits his 
high school friends. There has not been a sufficient period of time to access whether 
this part of Applicant’s life is behind him. His demonstrated intent not to use drugs in the 
future is in its infancy. This period of abstinence must be considered along with a 
demonstrated intent to disassociate himself from those with whom he used drugs. This 
is not to say that Applicant can no longer be friends with his high school friends. 
However, it does require a certain level of maturity that recognizes if his high school 
friends continue to use drugs he can not partake nor associate with them or be in their 
presence when they do so. On two occasions Applicant was in the presence of people 
using drugs, certainly a risk situation. I have questions whether Applicant will be able to 
resist the temptation and use good judgment to extricate himself from a situation that 
may involve his friends and their continued use of drugs. It does not appear he has 
done this in the past, even after he made his commitment to abstain. Therefore, I find 
none of the above mitigating conditions apply. It is too soon to determine if Applicant’s 
commitment to refrain from drug use is permanent. There is a certain level of maturity 
that comes with having a security clearance. Clearly, Applicant is a valued and trusted 
employee, but I am not convinced that he has made the transition to mature responsible 
adult in all aspects of his life.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who is 
working while also attending college. He has a history of using marijuana from 2004 to 
2007. He knowingly used marijuana while employed and after he was aware he was he 
was being recommended by his employer for a security clearance. Applicant primarily 
used marijuana when he went back home and with high school friends. He still 
maintains regular contact with at least one friend. Although he clearly understood that 
his use and purchase of marijuana was illegal he did not appear to grasp the security 
concerns raised regarding his drug use and the trustworthiness, reliability and judgment 
issues. Insufficient time has elapsed to access Applicant’s commitment to abstinence. 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
