1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------- )      ISCR Case No. 08-00044
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On March 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
DOHA received Applicant’s answer, requesting a hearing before an
administrative judge, on April 4, 2008. I received the case assignment on June 10,
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 18, 2008, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on July 10, 2008. During the hearing, I received six government exhibits,
marked and identified as Exhibits 1 through 4, and Exhibits 6 through 7 (Exhibit 5 was
not admitted.), and three Applicant exhibits, marked and identified as Exhibits A through
C. Also, at the government’s request, I took administrative notice of the facts listed in six
2
source documents concerning the People’s Republic of China. Based upon a review of
the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old married man with three children, ages 15, 10, and 8.
He and his wife are natives of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). He earned a
bachelor’s degree in physics from a university in PRC in 1988. Shortly afterwards, he
received a scholarship from an American university. In 1990, he moved here and began
attending the university that awarded him the scholarship. In 1992, he earned a
master’s degree in art and mathematics (Tr. 35), and in 1996, he earned a master’s
degree and a Ph.D in electrical engineering from another U.S. university (Tr. 35). 
Currently, Applicant works for a contractor performing modeling simulation and
system engineering for a government agency’s network. According to his supervisor, he
is a highly competent, conscientious employee (Tr. 20-22).
Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2006. They were
married in PRC in 1988. All of their children were born in the U.S. Applicant has a sister
who lives in Australia. Another sister passed away in 2005.
Applicant’s mother is a PRC citizen and resident. She worked as a physician in
the health division of the Beijing Foreign Affairs University before retiring in 1990 (Tr.
47, Ex. A at 2). His father worked as a property manager before his death in 2002 (Tr.
52, 59).
In 2005, Applicant talks with his mother frequently in an effort to help her cope
with the death of her husband and daughter. As she recovered, Applicant’s
communications began to decrease (Tr. 48). Currently, they communicate
approximately two or three times per month (Tr. 58). He does not support her financially
(Tr. 61). 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired professor, and his mother-in-law is a retired
pediatrician (Tr. 44). Both worked at the Beijing Foreign Affairs University and retired
more than 15 years ago (Exhibit A at 1, 3, Exhibit B). During the PRC’s Cultural
Revolution, they were accused of being “anti-revolutionary” and exiled to a remote area
of the country for more than 10 years (Tr. 46). During this era, Applicant’s mother also
experienced some persecution, but it was not severe as the persecution experienced by
his in-laws (Tr. 47).
Applicant’s in-laws traveled to the U.S. to visit his family in 2002, staying for two
months (Tr. 60). Since then, they have drifted apart. Currently, neither Applicant nor his
wife has a close relationship with them (Tr. 60). He does not speak with them, and his
wife speaks with them rarely (Tr. 59).
She refused, citing health concerns that prohibited lengthy travel.1
3
In 2005, Applicant paid $120,000 USD for the purchase a condominium in Beijing
(Tr. 48). He leases it to a tenant who pays him $600 USD per month in rent (Tr. 57). His
brother-in-law manages the property. Applicant does not pay any property taxes to the
PRC on the condominium (Tr. 58). Since approximately May 2008, he has been
attempting to sell it (Exhibit C).
Applicant’s primary residence in the U.S. is worth approximately $800,000. He
has a stock portfolio worth approximately $100,000, and has $10,000 invested in a
401k.
Since 2002, Applicant has traveled to PRC five times. In 2002, he attended his
father’s funeral, staying for five days (Tr. 52). In 2004, he visited his sister, shortly after
she was diagnosed with terminal cancer. He returned the following year when she died
(Tr. 53). In 2006, he visited his mother to persuade her to return with him to the U.S.1
Most recently, he visited in 2007 (Tr. 63). Accompanied by his family, he visited both his
mother and his parents in-laws (Tr. 64). Each of the trips, other then the 2002 one,
lasted approximately three weeks.
The PRC is a totalitarian state with a large and diverse intelligence infrastructure
in the United States (Exhibit VI at 1, Exhibit II at 28). It seeks to collect both military and
industrial information with the dual purpose of making the Chinese military-industrial
base more sophisticated, and the economy more competitive. (Exhibit II at 24; Exhibit I
at 24). U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials rate the PRC’s espionage
and industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the security of U.S. technology
(Exhibit III at 104). 
The PRC continues to abuse human rights in violation of internationally
recognized norms (Exhibit I at 9). Local police can unilaterally detain suspects for up to
37 days before releasing them or placing them under arrest (Exhibit V at 5). The PRC
routinely monitors its citizens’ communications (Exhibit 6 at 9). PRC security personnel
may sometimes place foreign visitors under surveillance, monitoring hotel rooms,
telephones, and fax machines (Exhibit 5 at 2, ¶ 8).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
an individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests.” Here,
the presence of Applicant’s family members in the PRC, a totalitarian country with an
aggressive intelligence-gathering apparatus, and a history of human rights abuses,
generates a security concern under AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, or coercion.” Similarly, Applicant’s ownership of a
condominium in PRC triggers the application of AG ¶ 7(e), “a substantial business,
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-
operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign
influence or exploitation.” Because of the nature of the PRC’s government, Applicant
bears a heavy burden in seeking to mitigate these security risks.
5
Neither Applicant’s mother nor his in-laws currently work at the Beijing Foreign
Affairs University. Consequently, I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.d in his favor. Their
retiree status does not minimize Applicant’s vulnerability to coercion, however.
Applicant has lived in the U.S. for approximately 18 years, and his entire
immediate family are U.S. citizens and residents. Since living in the U.S., he has
developed a successful career, and is respected by his professional acquaintances. His
strong sense of loyalty to the U.S. and his longstanding relationships and contacts in the
U.S. are not enough to outweigh the vulnerability to coercion created by his familial
obligation to his mother. None of the mitigating conditions apply.
Applicant’s sense of familial obligation to his mother and his concern for her well-
being are positive attributes. However, positive attributes can generate security
concerns as readily as negative ones. Here, the PRC is a large, powerful country intent
on enhancing its military and economic power by any means necessary. Under these
circumstances, Applicant’s vulnerability to coercion is compounded, rendering him an
unacceptable security risk.
Although Applicant is not close to his in-laws, there is a rebuttable presumption
that he could be subject to coercion from them through his spouse (ISCR Case No. 01-
03120 (February 20, 2002) at 4). His in-laws visited his family for two months in the U.S.
approximately six years ago. Applicant and his family visited them in the PRC
approximately six months ago. He has not rebutted the presumption, and none of the
mitigating conditions apply to these relationships either.
Applicant’s PRC investment property is minimal in relation to his U.S. financial
interests. Also, he is in the process of selling it. AG ¶ 8(f), the value or routine nature of
the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or
pressure the individual.”
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
6
Upon evaluating the whole person factors, I conclude that Applicant’s application
for a security clearance must be denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d-1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
