 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01205 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated personal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
security concerns raised by his financial issues. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
On April 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 28, 2008, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 18, 2008, Applicant 
changed his request to a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on July 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 17, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 12, 2008. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf but did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 21, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since about January 2007. He attended community college. He is 
married with three children, ages seven, five, and an infant less than a year old.1  
 
 The SOR lists 14 debts totaling approximately $17,817. Applicant admitted to 
owing all the debts. He attributed his financial difficulties to being laid off work for about 
two months in 2001, and then his wife was also laid off her job. He was a stay-at-home 
parent while his wife worked from about October 2005 through December 2006. The 
cost of day care was so high that it was better financially for him to stay home. His wife 
was again laid off in June 2008, and she has not yet returned to work.2 
 
 Applicant indicated that he plans on contacting an attorney and filing for 
bankruptcy, but he has not done anything yet. He accepted that he could be denied his 
security clearance based upon his finances and stated that he would reapply if that 
occurred after he brought his finances in order. He has not received any financial 
counseling. He does not have a complete grasp of his financial situation because his 
wife handles their finances.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on June 27, 2007. Question 28a asked, “In the last 7 years, have you 
been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Question 28b asked, “Are you currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He answered “No” to both questions.4 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86: 
 
I knew my credit would be run during the course of this investigation and 
had no intention of hiding my delinquencies. When I filled out the 
questionnaire I thought the question asked if I had been delinquent in the 
last 90 or 180 days in the present. I had been working very hard not to 
accrue any further debt so I answered “no.”5  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-20, 23-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-26; GE 1. 
 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant fully discussed his finances when he was questioned for his 
background investigation and when he responded to interrogatories. He was open, 
honest, and candid about them in his testimony at the hearing. His criminal record is 
clean.6 After considering all the evidence, I find there is insufficient evidence for a 
finding that Applicant intentionally falsified his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions as alleged in the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 15-17; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
He attributed his financial difficulties to his and his wife’s unemployment. That could 
qualify under AG ¶ 20(b) as conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant and his wife were unemployed in 2001. He voluntarily did not 
work for about 14 months in 2005 and 2006, choosing to be a stay-at-home father while 
his wife worked. His wife was laid off again in June 2006. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient information about what, if any, actions he took to resolve his finances when he 
and his wife were not involuntarily unemployed, for a finding that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling and his financial problems are 
not resolved or under control. There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors. He may file bankruptcy in the future, but his debts currently remain 
unresolved. He has not disputed any of the debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) are not 
applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 Applicant omitted some information from his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions; however, there is insufficient evidence to find that it was a deliberate 
omission. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a clean criminal 
record. He did not intentionally falsify his SF 86. His finances, however, are in disarray 
and remain a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant 
  
  
 
7 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
