1
                                                       
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-03146
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on November 15,
2007. On May 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is granted. 
Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR was notarized by a notary public whose
commission expires on August 23, 2010. The answer was not time-stamped as having
been received by DOHA, so it is officially accepted. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
July 18, 2008, and the hearing was held on August 7, 2008. At the hearing, three exhibits
(GE 1 through 3) were admitted in evidence without objection to support the
2
government’s case. Applicant’s four exhibits (AE A through AE D) were received in
evidence without objection. He also testified. In the time allowed for Applicant to submit
additional documentation, he submitted AE E (a performance evaluation), AE F (a
second payment to SOR 1.b. creditor), and AE G (a savings account printout). DOHA
received the transcript, and the record closed on August 15, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant essentially admitted the three allegations under the financial
considerations guideline of the SOR. He denied two of the allegations because he had
settled with or established payment plans with the creditor. 
Applicant is 29 years old. He is divorced, and presently lives with his soon-to-be
wife and their three-month-old baby. He began working as a welder for his current
employer in September 2007. He seeks a security clearance. 
Applicant completed high school in 1997 with a high school diploma. His security
clearance application (SCA, GE 1) reflects he was employed with more than 20
employers between 1997 and September 2007, when he landed his current employment.
Most of the jobs involved welding, with a few jobs handling heavy equipment. In
February 2005, Applicant enrolled in vocational college. In May 2005, he received his
degree as a certified welder. Though he did not provide a simple explanation for
numerous job changes in a short period of time, I find immaturity and financial
irresponsibility played a large part in not remaining at a job for a sufficient time period. 
SOR 1.a., 1.b., 1.c. GE 3 show that Applicant opened three credit card accounts
in 2001 and 2002. He made the minimum monthly payments for about three or four
years, but occasionally fell behind as indicated by the credit report (CR, AE 3). In 2004,
he stopped paying SOR 1.a. altogether. The debt is currently more than $12,500.00
because of the penalties and interest that have accrued. He fell behind in payments due
to his changing job situation, low paying jobs, and marital problems. The total delinquent
amount for the three accounts is $22,000.00. 
Applicant met his former wife in approximately December 2006 at a motor bicycle
race. In May 2006, Applicant began working as an independent contractor, where he
would hire out his services. Three to four days in a week, he would work on contracts. In
the last few days of the week he would search and negotiate new contracts for the
upcoming week. As an independent contractor, he earned between $1,500.00 and
$3,000.00 a month, depending on the job requirements and the type of heavy equipment
he would have to rent for the contract. Sometimes, he was unsuccessful in obtaining new
jobs, which meant unemployment on a sporadic basis for different periods of time. 
In August 2006, Applicant discontinued working for himself, married his girlfriend,
and began employment with her father as a heavy equipment operator. Applicant did not
know his bride had a drug problem, and did not want to work for a living. As the sole
means of support for his wife and her stepchild, Applicant struggled to make ends meet,
3
and was unable to maintain any payments on increasing number of delinquent debts,
including those listed in the SOR. 
After three months of marital trouble, Applicant obtained a divorce from his wife.
Shortly thereafter, Applicant lost his job with her father. Applicant believes he was
terminated because her father was disgruntled over his divorce. 
Between November 2006 and March 2007, Applicant was unemployed. During
the unemployment, Applicant sold his racing motorcycle. Realizing he was having
financial problems, his mother decided to provide him financial and moral support. 
After returning to one of his previous jobs for about four months, Applicant began
welding for his current employer in September 2007. Since then, Applicant has settled
with the SOR 1.b. and 1.c. creditors. See, AE B and AE C. On June 13, 2008, he
launched a repayment plan with SOR 1.a. and has made two payments pursuant to the
plan. See, AE D and AE F. 
Character Evidence
Applicant’s mother is proud of her son’s accomplishments in the past year. Taking
a keen interest in his job, paying his bills as AE D and AE F show, and taking care of his
future wife and young child, Applicant convinces his mother that he is becoming
financially responsible. Since June 2008, he has been paying his mother about $200.00
a month for the money she lent him to settle SOR 1.b. and 1.c. 
Applicant’s performance evaluation for September 2007 through June 28, 2008
indicates that he is a hard-working employee who is knowledgeable about his profession.
AE G shows that Applicant has opened a savings account.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.” 
The SOR identifies three delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,000.00. The
debts became delinquent between 2004 and 2007. financial considerations (FC)
disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC
19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. 
There are five mitigating conditions (MC) that are potentially applicable to the
circumstances. They are: FC MC 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); FC
MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the
5
person’s control, and the individual acted reasonably under the circumstances); FC MC
20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are
clear indications that the problem is resolved or under control); and FC MC 20.d. (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts). FC
MC 20.a. applies in part. Though the financial irresponsibility occurred in the last four
years, the number of past due debts were few in number. Applicant, with the help of his
mother, has taken substantial steps to pay off/settle the accounts, while establishing
documented job security to support his application for a security clearance. 
Applicant is entitled to substantial mitigation from FC MC 20.b. based on the
extenuating marital problems he encountered in 2006, and good-faith repayment efforts.
He exercised poor judgment by not ascertaining the full picture of his former wife before
he married her. However, he displayed good judgment for officially ending the
relationship after only three months, rather than compounding his emotional and financial
problems by trying to make an unsuccessful marriage work. Within six months of his
divorce in November 2006, he began to turn his life in a positive direction that his mother
is proud of. 
Because of the timely help of his mother, Applicant receives mitigation under FC
MC 20.c. The lifestyle Applicant led before November 2006 shows that he needed the
proactive financial help of his mother. Because of her assistance, he is more concerned
about his future now, and realizes that financial responsibility is an essential part of
continued stability in his future. By settling with two creditors and establishing a payment
plan with the third creditor, Applicant has adduced documented evidence of bringing his
financial obligations under control. His settlements demonstrate good faith efforts to
repay overdue creditors. The FC guideline is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
The AG indicates the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and whole person concept. The WPC is made of nine general policy factors:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
the participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and, (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s short history of financial problems has provided a much clearer picture
of his immaturity and irresponsibility over the last 10 years. However, he fully recognizes
that his divorce in November 2006, and subsequent period of unemployment was a
6
defining moment in his life. Since that time, his life has undergone some striking
changes. With the help of his mother in paying off his debts, Applicant has reestablished
stability in his lifestyle by mitigating the financial concerns. Having viewed the evidence
as a whole, I find for Applicant under the FC guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
