1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-01766
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On December 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline C, foreign preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2008, and requested an administrative
determination. On June 17, 2008, department counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Material (FORM). Applicant received it on June 25, 2008, and did not reply. I have
reviewed the FORM and have concluded that eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old married man with three children, ages 17, 11, and
nine. He earned an associate’s degree in electronics technology in 1989. Since 2000,
he has worked for a defense contractor as an information technology security auditor
(Item 5 at 6). He has held a security clearance since 1990 (Item 5 at 34).
Applicant was born in Mexico. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1989
(Item 5 at 2). There is no record evidence documenting when he emigrated to the U.S.
Under Mexican law, Applicant’s Mexican citizenship lapsed when he became a
naturalized U.S. citizen (Item 10).
In 2000, Applicant’s wife’s grandfather died, and her family offered to sell him his
house located in Mexico. Applicant accepted the offer, but was initially unable to
purchase it because Mexican law limits property ownership to Mexican citizens (Item 6
at 10). He then re-applied for Mexican citizenship through the consulate in the United
States, and purchased the property, after the Mexican government approved his
application.
The house is worth approximately $60,000 (Item 6 at 8). Applicant maintains a
bank account in Mexico to pay the house’s utility bills (Item 6 at 8). When he travels to
Mexico to visit relatives, he stays at the house (Item 6 at 11). The visits last
approximately three days. He has visited Mexico approximately 16 times in the last 10
years. Under Mexican law, dual nationals entering or departing Mexico must identify
themselves as Mexican (Item 8 at 2). 
Applicant voted in the 2006 Mexican presidential election. He viewed the
exercise of his Mexican voting rights as “an opportunity to influence a positive outcome
on the presidential race” (Item 6 at 6) by voting for the party “that aligns more closely
with the interest of the USA” (Answer at 2). Applicant is willing to renounce his Mexican
citizenship, if required, to receive his security clearance (Item 6 at 10).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.1
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Influence
“When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States” (AG ¶ 9).
Preference for a country need not be motivated by political or ideological reasons to
have negative security implications (ISCR Case No. 98-0476 (App. Bd. December 14,
1999) at 5). Here, Applicant re-applied for Mexican citizenship, 15 years after becoming
a naturalized U.S. citizen. He did so in order to exercise the privilege, limited to Mexican
citizens, of purchasing property in Mexico. He pays the utility bills for the property using
a Mexican bank account, and he voted in the 2006 Mexican presidential election. AG ¶¶
10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming
a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member,” 10(a)(7), “ voting in
a foreign election,” and 10(b), “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign
citizenship by an American citizen,” apply.
Applicant’s willingness to renounce his dual citizenship triggers the application of
AG ¶ 11(b).  His willingness to renounce his Mexican citizenship was only conditional.1
Absent any evidence of steps taken to renounce dual citizenship, the applicability of this
mitigating condition has minimal probative value.
Applicant’s vote in the 2006 Mexican presidential election was motivated by his
desire for Mexico to re-elect a pro-American president. Although his motive was
admirable, it does not trigger the applicability of any of the mitigating conditions. The
most relevant mitigating condition, AG ¶ 11(f), requires the vote in a foreign election to
be encouraged by the U.S. government. Applicant did not provide evidence of any such
encouragement.
Applicant has failed to mitigated the foreign preference security concern.
4
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Upon considering the whole person factors, I conclude it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to classified
information. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
