                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                          )  ISCR Case No. 08-03128 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On May 8, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 9, 2008, was provided to her, and she was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation.2 Applicant did submit additional information within the 30-day time period 
after receiving a copy of the FORM. Department Counsel reviewed Applicant’s 
additional material on July 12, 2008, and had no objection to material submitted. The 
case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 22, 2008, and due to 
caseload considerations, was reassigned to me on July 25, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.f.–1.g., and 1.i. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 1.c., 
claiming 1.c. and 1.g. are the same debt, 1.d.–1.e., and 1.h. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old SAMS-E Instructor/Data Conversion Technician, who 
has worked for her defense contractor employer since January 2007. She seeks a 
clearance in conjunction with her employment. Her employment “is contingent upon 
successful completion of a reference and background check.”3 The record evidence 
indicates Applicant attended college from September 1995 to June 2003; however, it 
does not indicate whether Applicant was awarded a degree.4 Applicant was married 
from May 1981 to November 1992. That marriage ended by divorce.5 Applicant has two 
children, a 26-year-old son and a 13-year-old daughter.6 Applicant served in the U.S. 
Army from October 1979 to June 1986, and from January 1987 to October 1992.7 
 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
2 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated June 9, 2008; and 
Applicant acknowledged receipt on June 17, 2008, which DOHA received on June 20, 2008. The DOHA 
transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Applicant receives $475 per month from the Veterans Administration for a service 
connected disability.8  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her e-QIP,9 her April 2008 Answers to Interrogatories,10 her 
March 2008 credit report,11 and her August 2007 credit report.12 The government 
established by Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented that Applicant has or 
had seven unpaid or unresolved debts totaling approximately $17,867. These debts 
were incurred over the course of several years. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.e.–1.i.)  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. has been paid, and the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1c. and 
1.g. are the same debt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. was sold to a credit management 
company and is also alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant asserts this is the same debt.13 
This debt (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.g.) has not been paid. Applicant also provided evidence in 
Response to the FORM that she is making payments of $500 per month for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e., which is for an automobile. She indicated that these $500 
monthly payments began in May 2008 and before that she was making $340 monthly 
payments. She did not provide documentation of this agreement, but she did submit two 
receipts for the months of May and June 2008 in her Response to FORM. 
 
Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.a., which alleges that she filed for Chapter 13 
Bankruptcy in December 2005, and that bankruptcy was dismissed in February 2007 for 
failure to make monthly payments. She stated that she made a conscious decision to 
discontinue her Chapter 13 payment plan because she “sought a reamortization of [her] 
loan with [her] mortgage company.”14 The government evidence, which consists of two 
credit reports, supports the government’s allegations in this regard.15 
 
Applicant also denied SOR ¶ 1.d., which alleges that her home mortgage loan in 
the amount of $112,000 was foreclosed upon for non-payment. The government 
evidence as well as Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories supports this allegation.16 
 
8 Item 5. 
 
9 Item 4. 
 
10 Item 5. 
 
11 Item 6. 
 
12 Item 7. 
 
13 Item 3. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Items 6 and 7. 
 
16 Items 5, 6 and 7. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Applicant was unemployed from April 2006 to January 2007. She indicated that 
she recently conferred with a credit counseling service, but did not submit any 
documentation reflecting that she retained their services or has an ongoing relationship 
with them and is following their counsel to resolve her indebtedness. She did state that 
she was advised by the credit counseling service that she was under “no legal 
obligation” to pay debts alleged in ¶ 1.b., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.i. because these debts were 
“charged off.”17 
 
In her Response to FORM, Applicant states her plan is to first pay off her 
automobile loan (SOR ¶ 1.e.) and pay off the remaining accounts until they are 
satisfied. Per Applicant’s April 2008 Personal Financial Statement (PFS), she has a net 
monthly remainder of $179.18 after paying all of her bills. This PFS does not address 
the outstanding debts alleged in the SOR.18 
 
Applicant offered no documentation that any of her outstanding debts have been 
paid, that she has set up payment plans, or otherwise resolved them. She was awarded 
a Bronze Star Medal for service from August 6, 1990 to April 1, 1991 for “Meritorious 
achievement during Operation Desert Storm in connection with military operations.” 19 
Applicant submitted six reference letters in her Response to FORM attesting to her 
good character. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
17 Item 3. 
 
18 Item 5. 
 
19 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”20 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).21 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something 
less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
21 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
t’s 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),22 the Government’s concern is 
that an Applican
 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The government substantiated its security concern under this Guideline through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence submitted. The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. and 
1.g. are the same debt and it has not been paid or resolved. In Applicant’s favor, the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. has been paid, and she is making automobile payments to 
the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e. In the absence of further information, I am unable to glean 
any further information, favorable or unfavorable, with regard to identified financial 
concerns. 
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
22  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by 
subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
listed supra, two are applicable: ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Considering the record evidence as a whole,23 I conclude none of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable or partially 
applicable except for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.h. With regard to these two 
debts, application of ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts, is appropriate. Applicant presented no evidence 
documenting efforts taken to contact creditors, or to resolve any of her other 
outstanding debts since she acquired them.  
 
I specifically considered FC MC ¶ 20(b): The conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances, and conclude it does not 
apply.  
 
Applicant asserts that she has no legal obligation to pay her “charged off” debts. 
While this may be true in a strict debtor-creditor context, it holds no weight under a 
security clearance analysis. The Appeal Board has frequently held that reliance upon 
legal defenses, such as the statute of limitations or state debt enforcement provisions, 
does not demonstrate honesty and reliability and therefore is of little probative value 
when resolving trustworthiness concerns associated with financial problems.24 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision.  
 
In fairness to the Applicant, this decision should not be construed as a 
determination that the Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of financial stability 
necessary to justify the award of a DoD security clearance. To the contrary, her 
mitigating evidence and whole person analysis suggests a sound potential for positive 
reform and outstanding accomplishments in the defense industry. Should Applicant be 
afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”25 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
23  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
24 See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 2 
(App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she 
is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.–1.d:26  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.–1.g.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
26 As noted supra, the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. and 1.g. are the same debt. This debt has not 
been paid or otherwise resolved. 
