 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02908 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on September 13, 2007. On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 29, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 13, 2008. 
The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2008. On July 15, 2008, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 5, 2008. The case was heard on that 
date. The Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4. Applicant testified. She offered no exhibits. The transcript was 
 
2 
 
 
received on August 12, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has been employed with her company since August 
2007. She is a high school graduate. She is a widow and has four children, a 24-year-
old son who supports himself, 17-year-old twin boys, and a five-year-old daughter. The 
three youngest children live with Applicant. (Tr at 5, 24-25, 74; Gov 1)  
 
On September 13, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. She 
answered “No” in response to question 28(a) “In the last 7 years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” She also answered “No” in response to question 
28(b) “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:  a $516 judgment related to a medical account entered in 
December 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 1); a $129 medical account placed for 
collection in November 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 10); a $243 account placed for 
collection in April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 6; Gov 4 at 2); a $389 credit card account 
that was charged off in April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 8; Gov 4 at 2); a $161 account 
that was charged off in March 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 3 at 10; Gov 4 at 2); a $1,465 
credit card account that was charged off in December 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 3 at 5; Gov 
4 at 2); a $1,751 account that was charged off in December 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 3 at 
9; Gov 4 at 2); a $1,070 credit card account placed for collection in March 2002 (SOR ¶ 
1.h: Gov 4 at 2); a $687 department store credit card account charged off in May 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 3 at 8; Gov 4 at 2); an $867 credit card account that was charged off in 
April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.j; Gov 4 at 2); a $215 delinquent cell phone account placed for 
collection in September 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.k; Gov 4 at 2); a $501 jewelry store account 
charged off in July 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 3 at 8; Gov 4 at 2); a $3,409 mail order 
catalogue account placed for collection in July 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 3 at 10); a $942  
account placed for collection in September 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 3 at 9); and a $289 
judgment filed against Applicant in December 2003 related to a medical account (SOR ¶ 
1.o: Gov 3 at 3).    
 
At hearing, Applicant admitted that she owes all the bills. She is unable to pay off 
any of the accounts alleged in the SOR. She has not contacted any of the creditors 
listed in the SOR. (Tr at 18-19.) 
 
Applicant works four days a week and does not have extra money to apply 
towards her debts. She is a diabetic. She does not have health insurance because she 
cannot afford it. Her net monthly income is $832 a month. She receives $788 a month 
 
3 
 
 
from social security for her twin sons. Her total household income is $1,620. Her total 
monthly expenses is $1,535. She has $85 left over each month after expenses.  (Tr at 
19-21.)  
 
In 2003, when Applicant was pregnant with her youngest daughter, she was 
hospitalized off and on as a result of complications related to her diabetes.  She was on 
Medicaid when she was hospitalized. She currently takes insulin which costs 
approximately $80 per month and sugar pills which are approximately $50. (Tr at 23, 
29.)  
 
Her husband passed away in 1999. Prior to his death, his monthly income was 
approximately $1,200 a month. Applicant previously worked in a convenience store that 
went out of business. She had no gap in employment between her last job and her 
current job. Her income is about the same. She is thinking of getting a part-time job. Her 
supervisor was going to try to give her more hours. She currently works four eight hour 
shifts. (Tr at 24-26.) 
 
Applicant testified that she was aware that she had delinquent debts at the time 
she completed her e-QIP application in September 2007. She told her supervisor that 
she had poor credit. She did not list her delinquent accounts on her e-QIP application. 
She is not sure why she did not list her delinquent accounts on her security clearance 
application. (Tr at 26-27, 31-32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has accumulated 
approximately 15 delinquent accounts from 2001 to 2007. The total approximate 
balance of the delinquent debt is $12,634.  Applicant is unable to pay these debts due 
to her limited income. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility is too recent to apply this mitigating 
condition.  All of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant struggled 
financially after he husband passed away in 1999. Three of the accounts are medical 
bills. Applicant suffers from diabetes and has no health insurance. There were 
circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected Applicant’s finances. 
However, Applicant has made no attempt to resolve her delinquent accounts.  It cannot 
be concluded that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. She does not 
earn enough income to resolve her delinquent accounts. None of the delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR have been resolved. It is unlikely that her financial 
situation will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has not taken steps 
towards resolving her delinquent accounts. Primarily, because she does not have the 
income to pay her delinquent debts.   
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list her 
delinquent debts in response to questions 28(a) and 28(b) on her security clearance 
 
6 
 
 
application, dated September 13, 2007. Applicant admits that she was aware that she 
had delinquent debts at the time she completed her security clearance application. She 
admits that she did not list her delinquent accounts on her security clearance 
application. She could not explain why she failed to list her delinquent accounts on her 
security clearance application. Under Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition (PC 
DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) applies to Applicant’s case.  
 
 The personal conduct concern can be mitigated. The following Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) have the potential to apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct 
the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts) 
 
PC MC ¶ 17(c ) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or 
the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) 
 
PC MC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur) 
 
PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) applies because in response to the SOR, Applicant admits that 
she has delinquent debts and that she intentionally did not list her delinquent accounts 
on her security clearance application. Her admissions reduce her vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. However, she has not met her burden to 
completely mitigate the security concerns raised under personal conduct. She did not 
make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct her omissions before being confronted with 
the facts. She was unable to explain why she failed to indicate that she had delinquent 
accounts in response to sections 28(a) and 28(b) on her security clearance application, 
even though she admits to being aware that she had delinquent accounts at the time 
she completed the application. There is insufficient evidence in the record to apply the 
other personal conduct mitigating conditions to Applicant’s case.  
 
 Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline E.   
    
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s medical 
condition, and that she is a single mother supporting three minor children. I also 
considered Applicant’s limited income which prevents her from resolving her delinquent 
accounts. An inability to pay one’s debts remains a security concern under financial 
considerations. Her deliberate omission of her delinquent accounts on her security 
clearance application raises concerns about her trustworthiness and reliability. The 
financial considerations and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
