 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: 
 ) 
                                                                      ) 
             ) ISCR Case No. 08-09152 
                                                            )                                 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 2, 2008. On November 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 15, 2009, Applicant requested a 
decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The government compiled its File of Relevant 
 
2 
 
 
Material (FORM) on February 10, 2010. The FORM contained documents identified as 
Items 1 through 9. On February 16, 2010, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to 
Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 
30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on June 24, 2010. He did not provide 
additional information in response to the FORM. On October 20, 2010, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges: “You used marijuana, 
with varying frequency, from about 1999 to at least 2008.” SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges: “You 
used marijuana after being granted a DoD security clearance in October 2001.” In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two Guideline H allegations and provided 
additional information. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; 
Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old, never married, and has no children. In 2003, he 
received a Bachelor of Science degree in business. Since December 2007, he has been 
employed as an information architect by a government contractor. In October 2001, he 
was awarded a security clearance. (Item 5; Item 9.) 
 
 On April 2, 2008, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 24a on the e-QIP asks 
the following question: “Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, 
have you illegally used a controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack 
cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, 
depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, 
PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?” (Item 5; emphasis in original.) 
 
 Applicant answered “Yes” to Question 24a and provided additional information. 
He stated that he used marijuana illegally approximately 20 times from June 2000 to 
April 2008. (Item 5 at 37.) 
 
 On October 11, 2000, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-
86). Question 27 on the SF-86 asked the following question: Since the age of 16 or in 
the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, 
for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, 
codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?” (Item 6 at 
10.) 
 
 Applicant answered “Yes” to Question 27 and provided additional information. He 
stated that he used marijuana two times between June 1 and August 15, 1999. (Item 6 
at 10.) 
  
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant was interviewed about his illegal drug use by an authorized investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 6, 2008.1 In the 
personal subject interview, as summarized by the investigator, Applicant stated that he 
began to use marijuana in 2000 while he was a college student. He reported that he 
took approximately five puffs on a marijuana pipe once a semester from June 2000 until 
May 2003. Applicant told the investigator that he did not use any illegal drugs between 
June 2003 and July 2006. Then, in July 2006, Applicant was fired from a job and began 
to use marijuana again. He used marijuana approximately once a week while alone in 
his apartment between July and November 2006. He then stopped using marijuana for 
about seven months. He began his weekly marijuana use again after he was laid off 
from a job in October 2007. Applicant told the investigator that between November 2007 
and the date of his personal subject interview on June 6, 2008, he took five puffs of 
marijuana from a pipe once every six months. He claimed that his marijuana use did not 
affect his speech or coordination or impair his judgment or reliability. He told the 
investigator that he currently used marijuana when he was bored. (Item 7 at 4.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that while his security clearance was 
“technically in effect” when he used marijuana, he did not have contact with “sensitive 
materials at any time while using marijuana.” He also noted: “One error in this finding is 
that my involvement with marijuana began around 2003, not in 1999, and it should be 
noted that it ceased in early 2008 – creating a nearly two year span to this point without 
the drug.” (Item 4 at 1.) 
  
                             Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
 
1 On May 20, 2008, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant confirmed the accuracy of the 
information in the investigator’s report and added the following information: “I have ceased using 
marijuana since prior to and in the 11 months to date since the interview.” (Item 7 at 2.) 
 
4 
 
 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
5 
 
 
The record shows that Applicant admitted the illegal use of marijuana, with 
varying frequency, for approximately nine years, from 1999 to at least June 2008. 
Although Applicant asserted in his answer that his involvement with marijuana did not 
begin until 2003, he completed an SF-86 in 2000 and admitted marijuana use in 1999. 
Applicant’s statement of 2003 initial marijuana use lacks credibility and is contradicted 
by his own statements on the SF-86 he completed in 2000. The record also establishes 
that Applicant used marijuana after being granted a DoD security clearance in October 
2001.   
 
The record also establishes that Applicant, who is now 29 years old, used 
marijuana in his college years. His marijuana use continued even after he graduated from 
college in 2003, and after he began his professional career. As recently as 2008, as a 27-
year-old adult, he continued to use marijuana. This conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. It also raises security concerns about his ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal 
drug use raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(g). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any 
drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(g) reads: “any illegal drug use after 
being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used, abstaining from drug use for an 
appropriate period, or signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
From 1999 to 2008, Applicant’s illegal drug use was on-going and frequent. The 
record shows that Applicant’s illegal drug use continued up to the time he completed his 
e-QIP in April 2008 and was interviewed by an OPM investigator in June 2008. 
Applicant’s illegal drug use was a long-term lifestyle choice. He used marijuana while 
entrusted with a security clearance.  
 
Applicant provided no information to demonstrate an intent not to abuse drugs in 
the future. He failed to provide evidence that he had abstained from drug use for an 
appropriate period; that he had disassociated from those with whom he had used drugs 
in the past; or that he had changed his conduct to avoid environments where drugs are 
used. Moreover, he failed to provide a signed statement of intent with an automatic 
revocation of his security clearance for any future illegal drug use or abuse of 
prescription drugs. Absent evidence of demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply in mitigation to the 
security concerns raised by the facts in Applicant’s case. 
 
  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant was candid in 
revealing his drug abuse when he completed his e-QIP and when he was interviewed 
by an OPM investigator, he failed to demonstrate that he would not return to drug use in 
the future. In his statement in response to the FORM, he failed to recognize or 
acknowledge that his long-term drug use, some of which occurred while he held a 
security clearance, may have had some deleterious effects on his judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. He failed to demonstrate why he should again be 
entrusted with a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his prolonged 
and relatively recent involvement with illegal drugs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.: Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
            Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
