The Government submitted twenty-two items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04184
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On April 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline H
(Drug Involvement), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM),
dated September 17, 2010.  Applicant received the FORM on September 24, 2010, but1
did not submit a response to the FORM. On November 5, 2010, the Director, DOHA,
forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. I received the case
2
assignment on November 8, 2010. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and
exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns
raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal activity), and Guideline H
(Drug Involvement). He denied all  allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1988 and received a diploma from a technical college in March 1992.
Applicant is divorced and has one child. He has worked for his current employer since
April 2007. (Item 6)
In 1987, Applicant was arrested twice. In October 1987, he was found guilty of
petty theft. He spent time in jail. He also admitted that he was charged in November
1987, with burglary, possession of a controlled substance, and carrying a loaded
firearm in public. (Item 10)
From 1987 until 1989, Applicant purchased and used cocaine. (Item 1 and 3) He
also used marijuana during those years. (Item 7) He was arrested on five occasions
between 1987 until 1989, on various drug charges. He admits that he was found guilty
on the charges. The convictions were for Possession of a hypodermic needle (syringe).
He spent time in jail for each offense. 
Applicant was arrested in February 2006 on four charges, including possession
of a narcotic drug, possession of a controlled drug, operating with a suspended
registration, and open container. Applicant was fined for operating with a suspended
registration. The other counts were either dismissed or nolle prosequi. (Item 11)
When Applicant was interviewed in 2007 by an OPM investigator, he
acknowledged the use of marijuana three or four times a week in 1987. He recalls using
cocaine on a weekly basis in 1987, and then on a daily basis from April 2005 until July
2006. Applicant explained that he used cocaine again from 2004 until 2006, because
he met an old friend with whom he had used illegal drugs. He elaborated about his
2006 arrest for drug charges. He told the investigator that he had Valium and was
arrested during a routine traffic stop. (Item 7) However, the police records detail
Applicant was in possession of a hypodermic needle and a pipe used for smoking crack
cocaine. (Item 10) 
Financial
The SOR lists delinquent accounts totaling $10,500. Applicant admitted the
debts and the credit reports confirm them. (Item 6) He disclosed his delinquent debts on
his latest security clearance application. (Item 1)
3
In November 2002, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. The
bankruptcy was discharged in April 2003. (Item 17) There is no information in the record
as to the origin of the debts or the circumstances surrounding the bankruptcy. Applicant
claims that the bankruptcy is the result of his 1999 divorce. (Item 6) 
After Applicant’s bankruptcy discharge in 2003, he broke his leg in 2005. He
could not work from December 2005 until June 2006. However, the broken leg was the
result of an auto accident when Applicant was using cocaine. He attributed his
accumulation of debt to the fact that he was denied workman compensation. From
2004 until 2006, Applicant admitted using cocaine “many times.” He attributed this use
to associating with the wrong crowd. As a result of a 2005 positive drug test, Applicant
lost his job in 2006. (Item 9) 
When OPM interviewed Applicant in October 2007, he explained that he was
attending a Narcotics Anonymous (NA) program. He denies that he omitted any
material information concerning possession of the pipe or hypodermic needle. He
states that he did not remember the facts or details of the incident. (Item 3)
Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in December 2009. Regarding his
financial situation, he explained that he was starting to pay on his debts. He claimed he
paid two debts with money from a tax refund (SOR 4.e and 4.f) He promised to start
payment plans on the SOR debts when he was interviewed in 2007.  
Applicant’s 2009 monthly net income was $2,759. He states that total monthly
debt payments are $150. It would appear that there is a net remainder of $54 in
disposable income. (Item 6) He has not received any credit counseling.  
Applicant states that he has been in recovery for four years. He now lives within
the law and has completely changed his life. He states that he pays back his debts as
best he can. He also noted that he does not associate with any illegal drug users or has
any intent to use marijuana or cocaine in the future.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is2
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion3
is on the applicant.  4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
5
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual's reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person's ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical
compounds identified and listed in the
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical
direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession
of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse
or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a
licensed clinical social worker who, is a staff member of a
recognized drug treatment program;
6
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program
prescribed by a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant admitted his use of illegal drugs (marijuana and cocaine) from 1987
until 1989 and again from 2004 until 2006. He used cocaine many times by his own
admission. He also tested positive for cocaine in 2006 and lost his job as a result of the
test.
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or
prolonged illness during which these drugs were prescribed,
and abuse has since ended; and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
Applicant’s last use of cocaine was in July 2006. This occurred after an
abstinence of almost 15 years. He met an old friend and decided to use illegal drugs
again. He did attend NA in 2006. There is no documentation that he continued
attending the recovery program. Considering his history of illegal drug use, there is
doubt about future use, and not sufficient passage of time for rehabilitation. 
7
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for For Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.” It also states that “an individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002.  Applicant
currently has delinquent debts in the amount of $26,000. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant had a fresh start in 2002 after filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant
was unemployed for several months in 2005-2006. After that he was steadily employed.
This may have exacerbated Applicant’s ability to meet his obligations, but he provided
no information about his efforts to otherwise meet those obligations during that period.
He has not provided documentation to show he has made any payments on his
delinquent accounts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition
(FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. As noted, Applicant had a short period of unemployment. He noted that
his 1999 divorce caused his initial financial problems. These events, no doubt,
impacted his finances. However, there is no evidence that he acted reasonably under
the circumstances. He allowed the delinquent debts to remain unpaid. There is no
record of any attempts to resolve his debt until after he received the SOR. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has not provided
evidence of any consistent payment plans. He asserts that he entered a repayment
plan but has not provided documentation to support this claim. His failure to provide
information about financial counseling obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c)
(the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control).
8
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under
dishonorable conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation;
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a
court-mandated rehabilitation program; and,
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-
martial of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year and incarcerated as a result of that
sentence for not less than a year. 
Applicant’s arrests and convictions between 1987 and 1989, and again in 2006,
show criminal conduct sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). Applicant admitted the
crimes. Although Applicant’s latest offense was not serious, it does not diminish the
pattern of criminal behavior. Although there was a gap in time between Applicant’s
crimes, he has not shown any insight into his behavior. He has not been successfully
rehabilitated. His conduct shows a pattern of untrustworthy behavior and his ability and
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. This leaves me with doubts
about his judgment and reliability.  
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
9
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the
act and those pressures are no longer present in the
person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher
education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement; and,
(e) potentially disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) above, may
not be mitigated unless, where meritorious circumstances
exist, the Secretaries of the Military Departments or
designee; or the Directors of Washington Headquarters
Services (WHS), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),
National Security Agency (NSA), Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) or designee, has granted a waiver.
After reviewing the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them apply in this
case. Applicant’s behavior is recent. He failed to submit sufficient credible evidence to
show he has been rehabilitated. Applicant has not provided any information for the
record concerning his employment evaluation record. Although he listed his jobs, he
provided no recommendations or performance evaluations demonstrating rehabilitation.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 16(a), a disqualifying conditions exists when there is
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Under AG ¶ 16(b) a disqualifying condition exists when “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”
10
Applicant’s 2007 response to an OPM interviewer did not disclose the fact that
police found a pipe and hypodermic syringe on his person when he was arrested in
2006. He claims that he only had Valium. Police records contradict his assertion This is
a misleading statement. In light of his alleged “confusion”, and past history of
untrustworthy behavior, I do not find his explanations credible.  His behavior and
personal conduct are disqualifying as they raise questions about his judgment,
reliability, truthfulness, and willingness to comply with the law.
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude that
none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his
falsification or concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-
advised. The intentional omissions occurred in 2009, and are too recent and serious to
be mitigated by the passage of time so far. I have serious doubts about his good
judgment and reliability. He has not provided information in this record to show that he
has met his burden of proof for his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is 42 years old. He has a history of behavior that involves dishonesty.
He has not shown successful rehabilitation or demonstrated true insight into his
behavior. Applicant currently has unresolved financial difficulties, despite having a fresh
start in 2002 after a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. Part of his financial difficulties
stem from a time when he admittedly was unemployed, used cocaine, and lost his job.
Applicant shows a lack of candor and questionable judgment. Although Applicant’s last
11
offense was in 2006, I have doubts about his reliability. He did not disclose material
facts concerning the 2006 incident when talking to the OPM investigator in 2007.
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his
circumstances, articulate his position, and carry his burden in this process. He failed to
offer evidence of financial counseling. He failed to provide documentation regarding
actual payments. I do not find his reasons and explanations credible for his criminal
behavior. Accordingly, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the four
above referenced guidelines. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2., Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 4.a through 4.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
12
