 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-11317 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On June 23, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing Investigation Request (e-QIP). On May 21, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 13, 2009, and waived his right to 
a hearing before an administrative judge. On July 27, 2010, he withdrew his waiver and 
requested a hearing.  (Tr. 8.) On August 9, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. On 
 
 
 
 
2
September 8, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for September 
21, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through U into evidence without objection. The record 
remained open until October 15, 2010, in order to provide him time to submit additional 
documents. On September 27, 2010, Applicant transmitted a letter and another exhibit. I 
marked the transmittal letter as AE V and the exhibit as AE W and admitted them into 
the record without objection from Department Counsel. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2010.                                                        
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a. 
1.c, 1.f, 1.k, and 1.l. He denied all other allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. In December 1980, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy. 
In February 2001, he honorably retired as a Chief Petty Officer (E-7). He was an 
aviation maintenance control chief. He received eight Navy Achievement Medals, a 
Navy Expedition Medal, and an Enlisted Aviation Warfare Specialist. He held security   
clearances while in the Navy.  
 
 After leaving the Navy, Applicant worked for a private company and within four 
years became the Director of Facilities. He remained there for seven years and then 
worked in landscaping for a short time. In July 2008, he started his current position as a 
computer trainer and technician with a federal contractor that provides support for the 
armed forces. (GE 1.)  
 
 Applicant married his wife in March 1983. They have three children, ages 24, 21, 
and 17. He has been the main source of family income over the past 25 years.  In June 
2007, his wife began using drugs and gambling, which lead to financial problems and 
the initiation of a divorce. Applicant was unaware of the extent of his delinquent debt 
situation or accounts until he was interviewed by the government investigator in 
September 2008 and reviewed his credit report. His wife managed the household 
finances up to that time. (Tr. 32.) He filed for divorce in June 2009 and anticipates 
finalizing it soon. (Tr. 32-33.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports from 2008 and 2009, the SOR alleged that 
Applicant accumulated 15 delinquent debts between 2007 and early 2009 totaling 
$39,069. Those debts were owed to utility companies, credit card companies, 
department stores, and for a car loan. The status of each debt is set out in AE U and 
documented by Applicant’s exhibits.  A summary of the debts is as follows: 
 
1. Nine debts, totaling $20,343 are paid. They are listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o.  (AE I, J, N, P, Q, R, J, and S.)   
 
 
 
 
 
3
2. Applicant started making monthly payments of $100 on two debts listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.g. The total indebtedness is $1,918.  (Tr. 36, 40; AE K, O.) 
 
3. Applicant is attempting to resolve the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.k. 
Those two debts total $5,429. He has contacted the creditors on more than 
one occasion, but been unsuccessful in reaching them. He is willing to pay 
the debts, which he acknowledged as his obligations. (Tr. 37, 46.)  
 
4. Applicant’s wife is responsible for the delinquent debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e for 
$1,271. He believes it will be included in their divorce agreement. (Tr. 38.)   
 
5. Applicant successfully disputed the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.j for $10,112 
because it is his wife’s debt and not his. It will be removed from his credit 
report. (Tr. 44-46; AE W.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net monthly income is $6,690. His expenses 
are $5,013, including payments on his two repayment plans, leaving $1,677 at the end 
of the month for other items. He intends to continue making the payments on the two 
delinquent debts because he is “trying to clear my credit up and trying to get the divorce 
behind me and move on [as] my intentions are to climb the ladder very quickly with [his 
current employer].” (Tr. 56.) He does not intend to have financial problems in the future. 
(Tr. 60.) 
 
 Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation. His senior program 
manager, a retired captain in the Navy, has known Applicant for three years. He 
referred to Applicant as his “top” associate engineer and detailed his responsibilities, 
which involve projects related to the nation’s security. He strongly recommends him for 
a security clearance. (Tr. 67; AE A.) His parents also wrote a letter. They believe that 
Applicant’s “ultimate destiny [is] protecting our Nations’ homeland from terrorist activity.” 
(AE B.) A friend also wrote a supportive letter. (AE C.)  
 
 Applicant testified candidly and credibly. Since learning of his debts, he has 
taken steps to resolve them. He is serious about achieving financial solvency and 
improving his credit standing. If he receives a security clearance, he may be activated 
and deployed to the Middle East to work on government bases. (Tr. 57.) “This secret 
clearance means a lot to me and supporting my family and ultimately protecting my 
country, which is very near and dear to my heart. . . I’ve always been concerned about 
our nation and our country.” (Tr. 56.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
 
 
5
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant began accumulating delinquent debt in 2007, which he was unaware of 
until interviewed by a government investigator in September 2008. Some of the debt 
remains unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 20(a) has some application. Applicant’s financial problems arose between 
2007 and early 2009 while he was married to his wife who began gambling and abusing 
illegal drugs, unbeknownst to him. Those unusual circumstances are unlikely to recur as 
he is in the process of finalizing a divorce. They do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Similarly, those circumstances were 
beyond his control. Once he learned of the debts, he began to slowly but responsibly 
resolve them, warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(c) 
and AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant did not present any evidence that he obtained credit 
counseling, but he did present evidence that his financial situation is under control, 
based on the actions he has taken to establish a workable budget and resolve his 
delinquent debts, including implementing a repayment plan for two debts. He paid nine 
of the 15 delinquent debts and is trying to resolve two debts. He believes one debt will 
be assumed by his wife when their divorce decree is entered.  
 
Applicant presented evidence that he successfully disputed one debt that is his 
wife’s, resulting in its deletion from his credit report and triggering the application of AG 
¶ 20(e). There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(f).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 48-year-old man, who 
retired from the Navy after more than 20 years of honorable service, during which time 
he held a security clearance. After leaving military service, he began employment with a 
federal contractor and continues to support the armed forces’ mission in the Middle 
East.  Applicant began accumulating delinquent debt in 2007, primarily due to his wife’s 
 
 
 
 
7
illegal drug use and gambling habits. Since learning of the problems, he systematically 
addressed and resolved about $33,000 of the $39,000 of the SOR-listed debt. Applicant 
paid nine of the 15 SOR-listed debts, successfully disputed one debt, is paying two 
debts through a repayment plan, and is willing to pay the two debts that remain 
unresolved and total $5,400. One debt will be included in his divorce. At this time, he 
has established a credible track record of resolving the delinquent debts. His candor 
regarding his financial situation and proactive efforts to achieve resolution of the debts 
has eliminated any ongoing potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Given his budget and awareness of the negative effect that delinquent debts may 
potentially have on his employment, similar financial problems are unlikely to recur. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrates that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR.1 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial confidence as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
1ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
