 
 1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ------------------------ )     ISCR Case No. 08-10955 
SSN: ---------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana in July or August 2008, after he had been advised of his 
employer‟s drug policy prohibiting illegal drug involvement, and he is unwilling to commit to 
abstain from future marijuana use. He was arrested several times between 1985 and 
August 2006, most recently for drunk driving, and he was not completely forthcoming about 
his criminal record when he applied for his security clearance in July 2008. Clearance 
denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On February 3, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to 
revoke his security clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
 
 2 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense as of September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on February 9, 2010, and indicated he 
did not want a hearing. The Government subsequently requested a hearing, and on April 
30, 2010, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On April 27, 2010, I 
scheduled a hearing for May 26, 2010. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Fifteen Government exhibits (Ex. 1-15) were 
entered into evidence, and Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on 
June 4, 2010. At the Government‟s request, before the introduction of any evidence, SOR 
4.b was amended to correct an obvious typographical error and allege that Applicant 
deliberately omitted from his July 2008 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) a May 1985 marijuana possession charge alleged in SOR 3.h. At the 
conclusion of the Government‟s case, Department Counsel moved to strike from the 
Guideline H allegations 2.a and 2.b the respective references to drug use and purchase 
while possessing a DoD security clearance, based on Applicant‟s testimony that he was 
unaware that he had been granted an interim clearance (see Tr. 45.). The Government 
also moved to change the date of the drug use and purchase to August 2008 based on the 
evidence. Applicant did not object, and I granted the amendments.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The amended SOR alleged under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, that Applicant 
was fined and ordered to attend counseling following his arrest for driving under the 
influence (DUI) in August 2006 (SOR 1.a); that he pleaded guilty to chemical test refusal, 
was fined, and ordered to attend alcohol counseling following an arrest for DUI in July 2006 
(SOR 1.b); that he was convicted of chemical test refusal following an arrest for operating 
under the influence of liquor in April 1995 (SOR 1.c); and that he attended alcohol 
counseling from December 2006 to April 2007 for diagnosed alcohol abuse (SOR 1.d). 
 
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Applicant was alleged to have used and 
purchased marijuana in about August 2008 (SOR 2.a and 2.b); to have expressed during a 
September 2008 security interview that he might use marijuana in the future if he felt like it 
(SOR 2.c); and to have been charged with possession of marijuana in May 1985 (SOR 
2.d). 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, that Applicant pleaded no 
contest to leaving the scene of an accident with property damage in May 2006, and was 
later arrested in April 2007 for failure to pay his fines, costs, and restitution (SOR 3.a); that 
he was convicted of a November 2000 criminal trespass offense (SOR 3.b); that he was 
sentenced to probation for one year after pleading no contest to an April 1995 leaving the 
scene of an accident charge (SOR 3.c); that he was sentenced to one year in jail 
(suspended) for criminal trespass in March 1995 (SOR 3.d); that he was charged with 
misdemeanor refusal to post bond and improper start in May 1990 (SOR 3.e); that he 
 
 3 
pleaded guilty to April 1990 charges of felony battery on a law enforcement officer, failure 
to elude a police officer, and license not carried, and was sentenced to 18 months 
probation for the felony battery charge (SOR 3.f); that he was charged with disorderly 
conduct in April 1990 (SOR 3.g); and that he was arrested in May 1985 for breach of 
peace, felony possession of a weapon in a motor vehicle, threatening, and possession of 
marijuana, and fined $35 for breach of peace (SOR 3.h). The alcohol-related offenses 
detailed under Guideline G were cross-alleged under Guideline J (SOR 3.i). 
 
Under the Personal Conduct guideline (Guideline E), Applicant was alleged to have 
deliberately falsified his July 17, 2008 e-QIP by denying that he had ever been charged 
with or convicted of a felony offense (SOR 4.a), by not disclosing the July and August 2006 
alcohol charges and the May 1985 marijuana possession charge in response to inquiry into 
any alcohol or drug related charges (SOR 4.b), and by omitting the August 2006 DUI 
charge and the May 2006 leaving the scene of an accident charge in response to inquiry 
into any other charges within the last seven years (SOR 4.c). 
 
Applicant admitted the DUI charges but denied the diagnosis of alcohol abuse. He 
acknowledged that he had used marijuana “very seldom,” had purchased it around 
September 2008, and had indicated in an interview that he might use it in the future if he 
felt like it. Before he presented any evidence at his hearing, he clarified that his admission 
was to having used and purchased marijuana but not to being involved with the drug while 
holding a security clearance since he had never held a security clearance. (Tr. 12-13.) 
Applicant admitted the criminal arrests alleged in Guideline J, but he denied any deliberate 
falsification of his July 2008 security clearance application. After considering the pleadings, 
exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 63 years old, and he has been employed as a sound dampening 
technician by a defense contractor since December 1998. (Tr. 115.) His wages have been 
garnished since 2000 to pay child support for his 15-year-old son, who was born to him and 
his ex-wife after their divorce. (Ex. 1, 2.) Applicant seeks a Secret clearance for his duties.  
 
Applicant served in the United States military from June 1967 to July 1973. (Ex. 1.) 
He began drinking alcohol at that time. (Ex. 2.) Around 1985, he began using marijuana 
sporadically, and he purchased it from street dealers whom he did not know. (Tr. 53-56.) 
His involvement with marijuana led to his arrest only once. In May 1985, Applicant was 
arrested for breach of peace, felony possession of a weapon in a motor vehicle, 
threatening, and possession of less than four ounces of marijuana, after he became 
involved in an altercation with a gas station attendant. He was found to be in possession of 
marijuana in the lid of a shaving cream can (Ex. 2, Tr. 63-65.), but he was fined only $35 
for breach of peace. The other charges were not prosecuted. (Ex. 4.) 
 
Applicant‟s consumption of alcohol, primarily a mixed drink (“Black Russian”), led to 
his arrest on several occasions starting in 1990. In early April 1990, Applicant got into an 
argument at a local restaurant with two vacationers. A local police officer working an off-
duty detail advised Applicant not to drive because he exhibited signs of being under the 
influence of alcohol. Applicant refused to leave the premises in a cab, and he was arrested 
 
 4 
for disorderly conduct and detained overnight. The case was eventually dropped. (Ex. 4, 
14; Tr. 89-90, 96-98.) Three days after his arrest for disorderly conduct, Applicant was 
stopped for squealing his tires. He threatened the officer, attempted to flee, and then 
repeatedly struck the officer on being detained. Charged with felony battery on a law 
enforcement officer, misdemeanor fleeing or eluding an officer, and a traffic infraction 
(failure to exhibit an operator‟s license), Applicant faced a maximum sentence of five years 
in prison. (Ex. 12.) Applicant refused to post bond on his arrest, and pending his 
appearance on the more serious charges, he was fined $70 in July 1990 for not posting 
bond and improper start. (Ex. 12,13.) In August 1990, he pleaded no contest to the April 
charges pursuant to a plea agreement, and was sentenced to three days served on the 
fleeing/eluding charge and the traffic infraction. Adjudication was withheld on the felony 
battery charge, and he was placed on probation for 18 months. On Applicant‟s motion, his 
probation was terminated early in May 1991. (Ex. 4, 11, 12.) Applicant was required to 
abstain from alcohol and illegal drugs during his probation. (Ex. 12.) Applicant has no recall 
of the offense but surmises that he had to have been drunk because he would never have 
committed the crime otherwise. (Tr. 114.) 
 
In March 1995, he was charged with breach of peace and misdemeanor criminal 
trespass at a casino. The breach of peace charge was not prosecuted, but he was 
sentenced to one year, suspended, for criminal trespass. (Ex. 2, 4.) He claims that he did 
not know that he had been banned from the premises. There were so many incidents at 
the casino that he cannot now recall why he was banned. (Tr. 86.) The available evidence 
does not clearly indicate that alcohol was involved, although Applicant testified that he has 
consumed alcohol at the casino while gambling, in quantity depending on how many hours 
he was there. (Tr. 87.) In early April 1995, he was charged with misdemeanor leaving the 
scene of an accident with property damage in his home town. He pleaded no contest and 
was placed on one year probation with court costs. (Ex. 9.) In April 1995, Applicant was 
arrested for operating under the influence (DUI), first offense, and chemical test refusal. In 
June 1995, the DUI charge was dismissed, but he was convicted of refusing to take the 
chemical test. (Ex. 6.) 
 
After his DUI charge in late April 1995, he stayed out of trouble until October 26, 
2000, when he was again arrested at the casino for criminal trespass. He was convicted on 
April 12, 2001, and sentenced to one year in jail, suspended, given a conditional discharge 
for two years, and ordered to stay out of the casino. (Ex. 2, 4, 8, 13.) 
 
More recently, in May 2006, Applicant was arrested in his hometown for leaving the 
scene of an accident with property damage. Applicant had consumed a couple of drinks at 
his then girlfriend‟s house. En route home, he claims he just touched the back bumper of a 
car, but he admits he left the scene because he had been drinking. (Tr. 80-83.) He was 
ordered in early July 2006 to pay a $500 fine, costs, and restitution. A warrant was issued 
for his failure to pay, but it was withdrawn in April 2007 when he paid in full. (Ex. 2, 7.) 
 
In early July 2006, Applicant consumed at least ten drinks of tequila over the course 
of nine hours while at the beach and a local strip club. Late in the evening, he was arrested 
for DUI, first offense, chemical test refusal, and operating an unregistered vehicle. He lost 
 
 5 
his driver‟s license for three months, was fined $2,000, and was ordered to perform ten 
hours of community service and complete alcohol counseling for refusing to submit to a 
chemical test. The DUI and unregistered vehicle charges were dismissed. (Ex. 2, 4, 5; Tr. 
75-.77, 112-13.) Applicant has not consumed tequila since that incident and does not 
intend to consume tequila in the future. (Tr. 77.) He was so drunk that day that he has no 
memory of the arrest. (Tr. 113-14.) 
 
In August 2006, Applicant consumed five Black Russians at a local casino. He was 
escorted out of the casino by security after he got involved in an altercation with a woman. 
He informed security that he did not feel he should be driving because he had been 
drinking, but he was told he had to leave. As he drove off the property, he was arrested for 
DUI. The court ordered him into counseling and accepted the program he was required to 
attend for the July 2006 DUI. (Ex. 2; Tr. 70-73.) Applicant attended group and individual 
counseling from December 14, 2006 until April 11, 2007, for diagnosed alcohol abuse, 
although he was unaware at that time of any formal diagnosis. (Tr. 67.) At discharge, he 
was given a good prognosis provided he stayed out of high risk situations. Applicant 
informed his clinician that he had learned his lesson and would not again drink and drive. 
(Ex. 2.) Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) was recommended to him as a possible benefit, but he 
chose not to go to AA. (Tr. 68.) 
 
Applicant did not require a security clearance when he started working for his 
current employer in 1998, although he was put on notice of, and agreed to abide by, his 
employer‟s policy prohibiting the use of illegal drugs. (Tr. 58.) At his employer‟s request, 
Applicant applied for a Secret security clearance on July 17, 2008. On his e-QIP, he 
responded “Yes” to question 23.d, concerning whether he had ever been charged or 
convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He listed only the July 2006 DUI, 
having deliberately elected to omit his arrest for DUI in August 2006 because he felt the 
incident was ridiculous and he had been set up. (Ex. 2; Tr. 101, 104.) Applicant has no 
explanation for why he did not list his 1995 DUI other than he filled out the form in haste 
and did not pay as much attention as he should have when completing the form. (Ex. 2.) 
Applicant responded “No” to questions 23.a (“Have you ever been charged with or 
convicted of any felony offense?”) and 23.f (“In the last 7 years, have you been arrested 
for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e 
above?”). He did not recall ever being arrested for a felony (Tr. 99.), and had no 
explanation for why he did not list his May 2006 arrest for leaving the scene of an accident 
other than he did not take acquiring his security clearance seriously enough. (Tr. 105-06.)  
 
The day after he executed his e-QIP in July 2008, Applicant‟s long-time girlfriend 
died unexpectedly. (Ex. 2; Tr. 47.) Applicant, who had used marijuana sporadically over the 
years when he felt like it (Tr. 54-61.),
1
 purchased marijuana for $20 and he smoked it in 
about August 2008. (Ex. 2.) 
                                                 
1
Applicant provided varying accounts of his involvement with marijuana between 1985 and August 2008. 
There is no evidence he used it on a regular basis, but it is likely he used it more often than once or twice 
during that period. He had told a government investigator in September 2008 that he had bought the 
marijuana that he used on the death of his girlfriend from an acquaintance, and that he had used not any 
marijuana in 15 years until then. (Ex. 2.) In response to interrogatories, Applicant indicated in January 2009 
 
 6 
 
On September 16, 2008, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
about his use of alcohol, his DUI and other criminal offenses, his alcohol counseling, and 
his use of marijuana after he had filled out his e-QIP. Concerning his marijuana use, 
Applicant reported smoking marijuana in the past but not within the past 15 years until 
three weeks before, when he purchased $20 worth of marijuana from an acquaintance and 
smoked the drug on the death of his girlfriend. He indicated he had no intent to smoke 
marijuana on a regular basis in the future, but that he might use it in the future despite its 
illegality if he felt like it. Applicant admitted he drank primarily Black Russian cocktails in no 
set pattern, but he indicated he was careful about not driving after drinking. Applicant 
persisted in denying any recollection of ever having been charged with a felony, even after 
being told of the assault on a police officer charge. He denied any misdemeanor charges in 
the last ten years other than minor traffic tickets. (Ex. 2.) 
  
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant related that he had been drinking 
monthly, but he stopped drinking since his girlfriend died. However, he also indicated that 
he might drink in the future at a dinner party or social occasion, although not like he had in 
the past. Concerning marijuana, he indicated that he “tried it for a short period and it just 
made [him] tired. It is only asking for trouble.” He claimed he decided to stop using 
marijuana shortly after 1985 or 1986 because it wasn‟t for him. As for his use and purchase 
of marijuana, Applicant admitted his involvement when his girlfriend passed away, which 
he described as a “rare incident.” Applicant added that he believed he was in an 
environment or situation where others were using drugs, he would leave. (Ex. 2.) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted he had used marijuana after 1985 or 1986 
sporadically (“It may be once every two years, every five years.”) and purchasing the drug 
more than once during that time. (Tr.  50-51.) He offered no explanation for why he did not 
admit to that use during his interview or in his response to interrogatories (Tr. 54-55.), but 
denied that he withheld the information. As for whether he intended to use marijuana in the 
future despite signing his employer‟s drug policy and applying for a security clearance, 
Applicant testified that many employees with red badges at his employment smoke 
marijuana, and that he was not going to lie and state that he would not smoke marijuana in 
the future. (Tr. 58-60.) He saw no problem with smoking marijuana to relax at home while 
watching television, but he would not use marijuana while out driving or at work. (Tr. 60.) 
Applicant does not intend to use marijuana regularly (“It‟s not as though I‟m going to smoke 
                                                                                                                                                             
that he decided to stop using marijuana “shortly after 1985-86” because it was not for him. (Ex. 2.) He 
described his use of marijuana on the death of his girlfriend as “a rare incident” and that he found himself in an 
environment where others were using drugs around him, he would leave. (Ex. 2.) At his hearing, he claimed to 
not recall the number of times he used or purchased it other than he bought the drug more than once, and he 
used it sporadically before his girlfriend‟s death “maybe once or twice” if he “ran into somebody, if somebody 
offered it to [him].” (Tr. 51-52.) He testified that he obtained the drug from persons he did not know (“maybe 
they were talking with somebody else, and [he] may have seen it. Maybe [he] went up to them.”). (Tr. 53.) He 
admitted at his hearing that he enjoyed the feeling marijuana gives him “on occasions,” and that he used the 
drug at home “on occasion.” (Tr. 61-62.) He could not rule out using the drug in the future if he felt like it (“I 
don‟t agree with kids, 15-16 and whatever, smoking and doing whatever because their brain to me just can‟t 
handle it. For somebody like myself, if I‟m at home and I‟m watching television, and I want to do that, I can do 
it.” (Tr. 60.) 
 
 7 
marijuana all the time. It could happen, and then I could not use it for two years, or 
whatever. It‟s just if I feel.”). (Tr. 62.) 
 
Applicant does not believe he has ever had an alcohol problem. (Tr. 65, 112.) As of 
late May 2010, he was drinking between two to four or five glasses of wine or Black 
Russians while out at a local racetrack on Friday or Saturday nights, drinking on the higher 
end only if he was there for a lengthy period. He was not consuming alcohol at home or 
during the work week. (Tr. 68-70.) Applicant is careful not to drink and drive after drinking 
more than a couple of glasses of wine or Black Russians. (Tr. 78.) He enjoys his job and 
has not had any incidents at work related to alcohol or illegal drug use. (Tr. 115.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
 
 8 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness.” 
 
Alcohol was involved in most of Applicant‟s criminal offenses, including some for 
which he did not face an alcohol-related charge (e.g., the April 5, 1990 disorderly conduct). 
While he does not now recollect the circumstances of the April 8, 1990 felony battery 
offense, he indicates that he must have been intoxicated since the offense was out of 
character for him. He also admits that he had been drinking before the May 2006 leaving 
the scene of an accident, although there is no proof that he was intoxicated. His April 1995, 
July 2006, and August 2006 DUI offenses clearly implicate AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether 
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c), 
“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” applies 
because of his consumption of ten or so tequila drinks before his July 2006 DUI. Moreover, 
whereas he was diagnosed with alcohol abuse by licensed chemical dependency 
counselors on staff of the alcohol program he attended from December 14, 2006, to April 
11, 2007, AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” 
also applies. 
 
 Given the long span over which Applicant allowed alcohol to negatively affect his 
judgment, it is difficult to apply mitigating condition AG ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, 
or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual‟s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” despite the passage of more than 3.5 years since his 
last DUI. Applicant‟s refusal to acknowledge the diagnosis of alcohol abuse does not 
preclude favorable consideration of AG ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or her 
alcoholism or issues of abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible 
use (if an alcohol abuser),” where he understands his drunk driving was serious and he no 
longer drives after drinking to excess.  Applicant‟s successful completion of court-ordered 
alcohol counseling with a good prognosis is evidence of action taken to overcome his 
problem. Although not entitled to the same weight in mitigation than had he volunteered for 
 
 9 
alcohol treatment, the good prognosis shows he was receptive to counseling. As for 
demonstrating the pattern of responsible use required of persons with diagnosed alcohol 
abuse, Applicant has no more than two drinks if he is going to drive. He consumes as 
many as four or five “Black Russians” on occasion while gambling at the racetrack or 
casino, but only if he plans to stay there for an extended period. The absence of any 
evidence of alcohol-related impairment since August 2006 is consistent with a moderation 
of his consumption. 
 
Applicant has the counseling and favorable prognosis required for mitigation under 
AG ¶ 23(d): 
 
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling 
or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in 
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Yet he lacks affiliation with a support network like AA. Although AA was recommended to 
him (“They said if [he] wanted to go, it would probably be good to go”) (Tr. 68.), there is no 
evidence that it was a required component of his aftercare. Under those circumstances, AG 
¶ 23(d) applies despite his failure to attend AA or similar organization. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an illegal 
drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual‟s reliability 
and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person‟s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
2
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
                                                 
2
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 10 
 
Applicant began using marijuana in 1985. When he was arrested for threatening a 
gas station attendant in May 1985, he had a small quantity of marijuana in his possession. 
He used marijuana sporadically thereafter, including in July or August 2008 after his 
girlfriend died. He purchased marijuana as well, at a frequency that he described as more 
than once. Applicant bought about $20 worth after his girlfriend died. Whether or not he 
purchased the marijuana from an acquaintance (Ex. 2.) or from a stranger on the street (Tr. 
53.), he knew that marijuana was an illegal drug (Tr. 56.) and that it was against his 
employer‟s drug policy. (Tr. 58.) AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; 
or possession of drug paraphernalia,” apply. Furthermore, when asked about his future 
intent, Applicant was not willing to state that he would not use marijuana again if he felt like 
it, even after he was reminded of his employer‟s policy prohibiting illegal drug use. AG ¶ 
25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly 
commit to discontinue drug use,” also applies. Disregard of the law raises considerable 
doubts about a person‟s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
The details of Applicant‟s illegal drug use are not fully known to the Government. 
Applicant was reluctant to estimate the extent of his marijuana use other than to indicate 
that it was sporadic. But he also admitted that he enjoyed the drug‟s relaxing effects, and 
that he saw no problem with using it at home while watching television. Also, if he 
purchased marijuana from strangers on the street, one has to question how he knew where 
to acquire the marijuana. His enjoyment and purchase suggest a level of marijuana 
involvement greater than the one or two times total between 1985 and July/August 2008. 
Furthermore, assuming his marijuana involvement was infrequent, AG ¶ 26(a), “the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual‟s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot reasonably apply when he is unwilling 
to commit himself to abstain from marijuana. None of the mitigating conditions are fully 
established. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in Guideline J, AG ¶ 30: 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person‟s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
By its very nature, it calls into question a person‟s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
Applicant has a long history of an inability or unwillingness to conform his behavior 
to the law. While the July 2006 DUI charge was dismissed, he does not dispute that he 
drank to excess before his arrest. He disputes the August 2006 DUI, claiming that he was 
set up, but the undisputed facts are that he operated a vehicle after he had too much to 
drink. In May 2006, he drove off after striking another car because he had been drinking. 
Assuming Applicant was unaware that he had been banned by the casino in March 1995, 
his arrest for criminal trespass should have given him reason to avoid the casino or at least 
determine whether he was still banned from the premises before going there in October 
 
 11 
2000. Police and court records substantiate that Applicant hit a law enforcement officer in 
April 1990. While adjudication was withheld on the felony charge of battery on a law 
enforcement officer, AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted,” still applies to 
that offense. AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 
31(c) are also applicable. 
 
None of the potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 apply. Although more 
than three years have passed since Applicant‟s last arrest, his purchase and use of 
marijuana in July or August 2008 constitute recent illegal behavior. Moreover, given his 
expressed enjoyment of the illegal drug and unwillingness to commit to abstention, I cannot 
reasonably conclude that his criminal conduct is not likely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a), “so much 
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual‟s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is not implicated. While Applicant shows 
some rehabilitation of his alcohol-related offenses, most notably the successful completion 
of outpatient treatment, it is not enough to dispel the lingering concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness raised by his persistent disregard for the laws 
prohibiting the abuse of controlled substances. Moreover, it is also difficult to apply AG ¶ 
32 (d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement,” in 
light of his deliberate misrepresentations on his July 2008 e-QIP (see Guideline E). The 
deliberate falsification of his e-QIP is punishable as a felony under 18 U.S.C. § 1001.
3
 
Although not cited in the SOR, I note Congress has recognized the importance of accurate 
information being provided to the government.
4
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in Guideline E, AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
                                                 
3
Title 18, Section 1001 of the United States Code provides in pertinent part: 
 
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, whoever, in any matter within the 
jurisdiction of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Government of the United 
States, knowingly and willfully - (1) falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or 
device a material fact; (2) makes any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation; or (3) makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to 
contain any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry; shall be fined under 
this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years or, if the offense involves international or 
domestic terrorism (as defined in section 2331), imprisoned not more than 8 years, or both.  
 
4 See footnote 5. 
 
 12 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant admits that he omitted his August 2006 DUI arrest from his e-QIP because 
he felt the charge was not justified (“the incident was ridiculous,” Ex. 2.), and he felt he had 
been set up. He was required to report that arrest in response to question 23.f concerning 
any offenses in the last seven years, if not question 23.d, asking about any charges related 
to alcohol or drugs. His deliberate omission implicates disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, 
or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant has denied intentional concealment of his other offenses, including his 
May 1985 possession of marijuana, April 1990 felony battery, April 1995 DUI, and May 
2006 criminal trespass. During his September 2008 interview with a Government 
investigator, he recalled that he was arrested about ten years ago for DUI, and that he 
“may have had a small amount of marijuana in the lid of a shaving cream can” during an 
incident at a gas station. He denied any recollection of a marijuana possession charge, of 
any felony charges at any time, and of any misdemeanor charges within the past ten years 
except for two or three minor traffic tickets. He attributed his omission of recalled offenses 
to having filled out his e-QIP quickly and not giving it the attention he should have. (Ex. 2.) 
At his hearing, he denied any concern that the Government would find out about his 
omitted offenses. When pressed for an explanation for the omissions, Applicant initially 
responded that he “maybe didn‟t take this red badge too seriously.” He later indicated that 
he likely could not recall the incidents because he was drunk at the time of his arrests. (Tr. 
106-07.)  Given the extent of Applicant‟s criminal record, and the dated nature of some of 
the charges, I accept that he lacked full recall of some of the incidents and charges filed 
against him. That said, it is difficult to believe that he would not recall pleading no contest 
to battery on a law enforcement officer, given he could have been sentenced for up to five 
years in prison and he was placed on probation for 18 months for the offense. His omission 
of the May 2006 leaving the scene of an accident was also likely intentional, given its 
relative recency respective to the e-QIP and his ability to recall the specifics of the offense. 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies to these omissions as well. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted,” is partially applicable in that 
Applicant “reported” during his September 2008 interview his unlisted August 2006 DUI 
arrest, and acknowledged that he had deliberately omitted it from his e-QIP. But I cannot 
fully apply this mitigating condition where he maintained during that same interview that 
other than the two DUIs in 2006, he had only two or three minor traffic tickets within the 
past ten years. The May 2006 leaving the scene of an accident cannot reasonably be 
described as a minor traffic ticket, especially where a warrant was issued for his arrest for 
failure to pay court ordered fines, costs, and restitution. Moreover, he was not completely 
 
 13 
candid about his marijuana involvement either during his subject interview or in his January 
2009 response to interrogatories. (Tr. 53-54.) He falsely claimed in January 2009 that he 
had tried marijuana in 1985 or 1986 but abstained thereafter until after the death of his 
girlfriend in 2008. His misrepresentations in response to DOHA interrogatories and during 
his subject interview could have been alleged under Guideline E. See AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) (stating, “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative”). Because the Government did not allege any 
falsification of Applicant‟s interview or interrogatories, these misrepresentations cannot 
provide an independent basis for denial of his security clearance However, they are 
relevant in assessing the extent of his reform of his e-QIP omissions.
5
 
 
 By signing the e-QIP, Applicant certified that his statements on the form were “true, 
complete, and correct to the best of [his] knowledge and belief and [were] made in good 
faith.” He was put on notice that a knowing and willful false statement on the form could be 
punished by a fine or imprisonment or both under 18 U.S.C. § 1001. His knowing omission 
of the August 2006 DUI is enough to preclude me from considering AG ¶ 17(c), “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He shows little to no 
remorse for his false statements, so I also cannot apply AG ¶ 17(d), “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other 
positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur.” The personal conduct concerns are not completely mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
                                                 
5
In ISCR Case No. 03-020327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant‟s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant‟s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under Directive 
Section 6.3. 
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 
24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes and not for any other 
purpose. 
 
 14 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant admits he engaged in “petty, minor, little crazy stuff” when he was 
younger, and that he was so drunk in July 2006 that has no memory of the arrest itself. (Tr. 
113-14.) While he realized on the occasion of his August 2006 that he was too intoxicated 
to drive safely, he still got behind the wheel of his car after casino security told him he had 
to leave. To his credit, he successfully completed his alcohol counseling and has not 
allowed his use of alcohol to negatively affect his judgment thereafter. But he has shown 
little reform of his illegal drug abuse. Although it was made abundantly clear to Applicant at 
his hearing that he is not allowed to smoke marijuana while holding a security clearance, 
Applicant is unwilling to commit himself to abstention from future marijuana use. He sees 
little wrong with using marijuana in his own home when he wants to. Applicant has made a 
choice that is incompatible with the fiduciary obligations of a security clearance. Due to the 
drug involvement, criminal conduct, and personal conduct concerns detailed above, I 
cannot conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 15 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 4.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 4.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 4.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
