                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11951 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 19, 2008, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On April 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 7, 2010. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 24, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 16, 2010, and I received 
the case assignment on the same day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 18, 
2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 25, 2010. The Government 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Exhibits A and B, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on July 7, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until 
August 3, 2010, to submit additional matters.  On August 3, 2010, he submitted Exhibit 
C, without objection. Applicant then requested permission to submit another three 
exhibits. Department Counsel had no objection, so I granted the request to submit 
Exhibits D to F on August 30, 2010. The record closed on August 31, 2010. Based upon 
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated he received the hearing notice on June 18, 
2010, by email, within the 15 days required under the Directive. (Tr. 11) I advised 
Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15-days notice before the 
hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice. His email is marked 
as an exhibit. (Tr. 11, 12; Administrative Exhibit)  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, married, and has two children. He works for a defense 
contractor in the aviation business. He served in the U.S. Army from 1996 to 1999. He 
had a top secret security clearance in the Army. After separating from the Army, he 
worked in several jobs until he obtained a degree in aviation maintenance. He used 
student loans to finance that education. Applicant admits he spent money beyond his 
ability to repay it during the 2000 to 2005 period. (Tr. 20-26, 32-50; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant owes nine delinquent debts that are listed in the SOR. Those debts 
total $24,263. He also owes $26,181 on his student loans. He pays $150 monthly on his 
student loans and they are in good standing. He has paid the interest on the student 
loans regularly for the past three years. (Tr. 41-43, 50-59; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $123 to a medical provider for treatment to his son (Para. 1.a). 
Applicant will pay that debt as soon as he has money to do so. This debt is not yet 
resolved. (Tr. 55, 56, 76; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 A telephone company has a $231 debt from 2004 that Applicant owes (Para. 
1.b). Applicant has not yet contacted that creditor. He intends to pay the debt when 
funds are available. This debt is not yet resolved. (Tr. 56, 57; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes a satellite television company $655 for service when he lived in 
another state (Para. 1.c). He had a roommate who was suppose to pay the bill but did 
not. Applicant is attempting to obtain payment from the former roommate. Applicant has 
not contacted the creditor to arrange payment. This debt is not yet resolved. (Tr. 57, 58; 
Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant moved from one apartment to another and the former landlord is 
charging him an extra month’s rent of $1,254 including fees in 2007 (Para. 1.d). 
Applicant contacted the creditor to dispute the amount owed five months ago They 
could not reach an agreement, so he will work to repay the amount owed.  This debt is 
not yet resolved. (Tr. 57, 58; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 A cellular telephone company seeks $496 from Applicant for service provided 
five years ago (Para. 1.e). He will repay it, but it has not been resolved yet. (Tr. 59; 
Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 A gym membership debt dates to 2004 (Para. 1.f).  Applicant joined a gym and 
used it once. He did not cancel his membership properly and the company continued to 
bill him for his monthly fee and penalties. The debt is now $1,593. Applicant wants to 
settle the debt for $850. No resolution has yet occurred. (Tr. 22, 59; Exhibits 2-5, F) 
 
 In 2005 an auto accident occurred in which Applicant suffered injuries (Para. 
1.g).  Applicant did not have medical insurance at the time. He recalls paying the $1,531 
medical bill but cannot find documents to prove his assertion. If he cannot find the 
documents, he will repay the debt again. This debt may be resolved but currently it 
shows on credit reports as due and owing. (Tr. 60; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 The debt for $801 owed to a bank was settled for $250 and paid on August 31, 
2010 (Para. 1.h). This debt is resolved. (Tr. 22; Exhibits 2-5, D, E) 
 
 The final debt owed is to a bank on a car loan (Para. 1.i). The amount owed from 
2005 was $17,579. The vehicle was repossessed. Applicant settled this debt on July 30, 
2010, for $4,000. The creditor sent Applicant two letters as evidence the debt is 
satisfied by payment of the settlement. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 22, 23, 50, 51; 
Exhibits 2-5, B, C) 
 
 Applicant is the sole wage earner in his family. His family’s welfare and prosperity 
is important to him, hence the need to repay these debts and clear his credit record of 
these overdue financial obligations. In addition to paying his delinquent debts, he is also 
paying his wife’s credit card debts incurred before they were married. Applicant has one 
company credit card on which there is no balance owed. He is allowed to use that card 
when he travels on business. He and his wife do not have any other credit cards. 
Applicant moved to a less-expensive apartment in the past year to reduce his rent from 
$1,400 to $950. The personal financial statement in Exhibit 4 is otherwise the same now 
as July 2009 when completed. Applicant has not incurred any new debt except for his 
car on which he made a $3,000 deposit on a $12,000 purchase price. Applicant does 
 
4 
 
 
not have any money in his checking or savings accounts on a continuing basis. 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling. (Tr. 30, 63, 70-77) 
 Applicant’s supervisor wrote a character letter on his behalf. He stated Applicant 
has an excellent work ethic and is very professional in his daily job performance. 
Applicant knows his duties and aircraft extremely well. The supervisor recommends 
Applicant receive his security clearance. (Exhibit A)  
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $24,263 in delinquent debt from 2004 to the present time 
that he did not begin resolving until 2009 and 2010.  Applicant has nine delinquent 
debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Seven of the debts are on-going and unpaid. The other two were unpaid until 
July and August 2010. Now they are settled and resolved. Therefore, the delinquencies 
are recent and not infrequent. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply because Applicant spent more money than he could 
repay on the earnings he made from 2000 to 2005. He knew what he was doing and 
admitted at the hearing he spent irresponsibly.  
  
AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply because Applicant did not obtain any financial 
counseling.   
 
Applicant focused his efforts on starting a regular process of paying his debts. 
Based on his current progress in repaying his delinquent debts, it is likely Applicant will 
have the remaining seven debts, currently unresolved, paid within the near future.  He 
intends to pay them. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to 
repay his delinquent debts demonstrated by his expressed commitment and his current 
progress in repaying the two largest debts and maintaining three years of monthly 
payments on his student loans. He may also have repaid the $1,531 medical debt from 
2005 but must find documentary proof he paid it. His frank and forthright discussion of 
his past financial errors, coupled with his current efforts to resolve his debts, shows 
Applicant is credible in his commitment about his future repayment plans. He testified 
his family is important to him and he wants to provide a better life for them. Applicant 
reduced his living costs substantially and is well-regarded at his work place. All these 
attributes show he will adhere to his repayment plan to resolve the delinquent debts so 
he can maintain his employment.  
 
Applicant sought to dispute the rent debt and the satellite television debt, but 
decided not to do so. AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply because there is no ongoing or valid 
dispute in progress. 
 
Finally, there is no affluence mentioned as a source of payment. AG ¶ 20 (f) does 
not apply. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who spent 
more than he could afford to repay while he was single. He is now married and fathered 
two children in the past several years.  
 
Applicant also obtained a responsible job in the aviation business, at which he is 
talented and enjoys. He now recognizes his financial obligations must be paid if he is to 
provide a decent life for his family, including the future purchase of a house. He has not 
incurred new delinquent debt since 2007 when he met his wife. He does not have credit 
cards. His only debt is for his current car on which he owes less than $10,000. He is 
making those payments. His income is directed toward supporting his family and 
repaying his debts as listed in the SOR. He is current on his student loan payments.  
 
It is obvious Applicant has a mature understanding of his financial situation and 
what he needs to do to resolve the past delinquencies. He has resolved over $17,000 of 
debt through settlement agreements. The remaining seven debts total $5,760. This 
amount can be paid within a relatively short time period with the continued diligence 
Applicant has applied to date in resolving the debts.  
 
As the Appeal Board has ruled concerning the successful mitigation of security 
concerns arising from financial considerations., “[a]n applicant is not required to show 
that [he] has completely paid of [his] indebtedness, only that [he] has established a 
reasonable plan to resolve [his] debts and has ‘taken significant actions to implement 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
that plan.”1 He has established a credible track record of debt payments, showing 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.i:   For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
1 ISCR Case no. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul.6, 2006)). 
