 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04536
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
On December 30, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant interrogatories  to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying1
information in his background. After Applicant responsed to the interrogatories, DOHA
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 Ax. 3 is further subdivided into Ax. 3.a - 3.q. Ax. 3.a - 3.n provide information that directly corresponds to4
SOR allegations 1.a - 1.n. Ax. 3.e, 3.f, 3.i, and 3.k are blank because Applicant denied the debt, had disputed
the debt, or admitted the debt but had nothing to submit regarding the debt.
2
information. On April 14, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise disqualifying security concerns addressed in
the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on June 23, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued the next day,
I convened a hearing in this matter on July 15, 2010. The parties appeared as
scheduled. The Government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 - 7), which were admitted
without objection. Applicant testified, presented three witnesses, and proffered five
exhibits (Ax. 1 - 5 ). All of Applicant’s exhibits were admitted, with Ax. 3.o - 3.q admitted4
over Department Counsel’s objection as to relevance. DOHA received the transcript of
hearing (Tr.) on July 29, 2010.
Procedural Issue
The record closed at the end of the hearing on July 15, 2010, without any
provision or request for additional time for post-hearing submissions. However, on
August 2, 2010, Department Counsel forwarded to me a post-hearing submission from
the Applicant regarding the mortgage debt listed at SOR 1.k. Department Counsel
objected to its admission because it was not timely submitted and not properly before
me as part of this record. In the alternative, Department Counsel submitted that,
because the document “provides no definitive information” about the debt at issue, it
“should be given little or no weight.”
During the hearing, Applicant was asked by Department Counsel if he could
document his claim that the $86,000 mortgage debt at SOR 1.k had been satisfied
through foreclosure. Applicant indicated that he had not received a response to
repeated requests from the lender about the status of that debt. (Tr. 61 - 63) Applicant’s
post-hearing submission is a printout from a July 20, 2010, credit report indicating that
the mortgage account in question had a balance of $0. It also showed that the mortgage
was foreclosed and that the last payment was made in April 2008.
The DOHA hearing process is intended to produce well-informed decisions
based on all available information that is relevant and material to the issues presented.
Applicant’s post-hearing submission bears directly on the allegation at SOR 1.k. It also
addresses questions posed by Department Counsel about that allegation, and the
information it presents is consistent with Applicant’s answers. 
Department Counsel’s objection is overruled, and Applicant’s post-hearing
submission is admitted as Ax. 3.k. I have considered this document in the context of the
3
record as a whole, and I am mindful of the need to assign appropriate weight to this
document, as well as all of the documents presented by both parties.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes approximately
$1,235,631 for 14 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.n). In response to the SOR,
Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 1.a - 1.d, 1.f - 1.h, and 1.j - 1.n. As to SOR 1.a -
1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.n, Applicant also averred that he has paid those debts. As to
SOR 1.f, he averred that he was making payments on that debt, which he expected to
be paid in full by July 2010. Applicant’s denials of SOR 1.k - 1.m were based on his
explanation that these mortgage accounts had been foreclosed and that he owed
nothing further. 
Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR 1.e and 1.i. Applicant stated that the
terms of his divorce obligated his ex-wife to pay both debts, that he had recently been
assigned the debt at SOR 1.i, and that he intended to pay it. Based on a review of
Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 33 years old and employed by a defense contractor as an
information assurance engineer, a job for which he requires a security clearance.
Applicant was hired in April 2008, and he has earned the confidence of his company
supervisors and the Government officials whom his company supports. All of Applicant’s
witnesses testified that they were aware of Applicant’s financial problems, yet they all
recommended him for a position of trust involving classified information. There have
been no incidents of irresponsible behavior, such as misuse of his corporate travel
credit card, or of other corporate or Government resources. (Gx. 1; Ax. 1; Ax. 2; Tr. 73 -
88) Applicant also served in the United States Army from June 1995 until June 1999. He
first received a security clearance for his military duties. (Gx. 1)
 
Applicant has been married twice. His first marriage lasted from July 2001 until
he was divorced in July 2009. He and his ex-wife separated in July 2007, and they have
one child (age 4) together. Applicant remarried in January 2010. (Gx. 1; Tr. 56) 
Throughout his first marriage, Applicant felt pressured by his ex-wife to make
financial decisions with which he disagreed. For example, in about 2000 or 2001, she
threw a tantrum until he finally agreed to buy a new car when neither was earning much
money. He was working at a home improvement retailer at the time. (Gx. 1; Tr. 66 - 67)
Applicant’s first marriage began to deteriorate in 2003. It was around that time that
Applicant’s wife received an inheritance of about $250,000. They disagreed on the best
use of their windfall. Applicant wanted to invest the money, but his ex-wife wanted to
use the money as down payments for two houses, which Applicant thought they would
rent out. They had already bought the house they were living in for about $240,000. In
2005, using his ex-wife’s inheritance (Tr. 71 - 72), they financed the purchase of a large
house at a beach resort area on the east coast for $850,000, and another smaller house
in the same area for about $125,000. Applicant was the only named borrower for all of
4
their mortgages, which included an equity loan on their marital residence. (Gx. 2; Gx. 8;
Tr. 43 - 46)
Applicant’s wife wanted them to live in the large beach house and rent out the
other two. Applicant knew at the time that they did not have the income to make the
required monthly payments on that house. However, she eventually prevailed on him,
and they moved into the beach house. (Gx. 2; Tr. 66 - 67) 
The two rental properties were leased to friends of Applicant’s ex-wife. They paid
rent directly to her, and she paid the mortgages from the rents. In 2007, Applicant and
his ex-wife separated, and Applicant moved to the west coast to take a new job.
According to a temporary order (Ax. 5) pending a final divorce decree, Applicant would
continue to pay the mortgage on all three houses and his ex-wife would live in the
marital residence (the beach house). By that time, they were trying to sell the other two
houses, but the housing market and the values of their properties had declined
significantly, which virtually precluded receiving acceptable offers. 
Applicant assumed that his ex-wife would continue collecting rents and paying
the mortgages until the leases ended or the houses sold. However, she was collecting
rents without paying the mortgages. The house they lived in before they moved to the
beach house was eventually foreclosed. Applicant has no further obligation on this debt,
which is alleged at SOR 1.l. (Ax. 3.l)
The other rental property was to be sold through a short sale for $105,000
against a mortgage of $125,000. However, the lender refused to approve the short sale
and foreclosed on the mortgage. The house was sold at auction for about $80,000. As
with the other rental, the foreclosure ended Applicant’s obligation for this debt, which is
alleged at SOR 1.k. (Tr. 46 - 47; Ax. 3.k)
Applicant moved back from the west coast in early 2008. He thought he would be
able to live in one of the two rental properties he and his ex-wife owned. However,
tenants still occupied one house, but the mortgage was not being paid. It took more
than two months to have them evicted. Tenants had abandoned the other house, and
had damaged it so that it was uninhabitable. Applicant was thus faced with having to
pay for his own accommodations, while taking on the expenses of two rental properties
that produced no revenue. (Tr. 18 - 19, 44 - 46) These circumstances caused him to
rely on credit cards to meet expenses, and he was unable to continue paying the
mortgage on the marital residence. That mortgage was foreclosed as well. However,
with all three foreclosures, Applicant incurred additional income tax liability stemming
from the end of his mortgage obligations. There is no indication that he has not fulfilled
his income tax obligations.
The divorce decree also allocated responsibility for marital debts between
Applicant and his ex-wife. The debts alleged at SOR 1.e, 1.f, 1.I, 1.j, and 1.n were
assigned to his ex-wife. However, she failed to pay them. Applicant has paid SOR 1.c,
1.j, and 1.n, and he intends to pay the other two beginning with SOR 1.f. (Answer to
SOR; Tr. 52 - 54; Gx. 2; Ax. 3.c; Ax. 3.j; Ax. 3.n; Ax. 4)
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
5
The divorce decree requires Applicant to pay $850 each month for support of his
child. He actually pays about $1,000 each month to help with daycare. There is no
record of any missed or late support payments. Applicant is also required to provide
medical coverage for his child, but his ex-wife is required to pay the first $250 of any
medical costs. Her practice has been to pay only the required co-payments. When the
balance of the child’s medical bills becomes past-due, she sends it to Applicant. The
debts listed at SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d arose in this manner. Applicant has paid all three
debts. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 51 - 52; Ax. 3.a; Ax. 3.c; Ax. 3.d)
The debt alleged at SOR 1.b ($3,636) was for a delinquent credit card Applicant
used when he was trying to make ends meet during his divorce. Applicant paid that debt
through a settlement with the collection agency that obtained a civil judgment against
him for the debt. (Ax. 3.b)
Applicant incurred about $20,000 in fees for legal services from two lawyers for
his divorce and his real estate transactions. He has timely made monthly payments to
both accounts as agreed to with the lawyers. (Tr. 48; Ax. 3.p; Ax. 3.q) Applicant has
also kept a zero balance on the one credit card in his name. (Ax. 3.o)
Applicant began resolving his past-due debts about two years ago. He and his
new wife, who also works full-time, have no debt. They live well within their means (Tr.
84 - 88). After all expenses, including payments on his remaining debts from his first
marriage, they have about $200 in positive cashflow. They try to put as much of any
leftover income as possible into savings each month. Applicant estimates he now has
about $900 in savings. (Tr. 68 - 71) Applicant has not obtained any formal financial
counseling; however, he is a regular listener to a financial expert radio program. That
expert advises that someone in Applicant’s position should avoid any new debt, and
should pay off past-due debts starting with the smallest and working through to the
largest. Applicant demonstrated that he is following that advice.
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of available relevant and material
information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the6
adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in
¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept,
those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who7
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.n; that is, that Applicant owed $1,235,631 for 14 delinquent debts.
Available information showed that those debts were past due since at least 2007 and
7
that some of them are still being resolved. Accordingly, the record requires application
of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
In response to the SOR and at hearing, Applicant established that the debts
alleged were primarily the result of the failure of his marriage. While he shares
responsibility for the financial decisions he and his ex-wife made, the foreclosures on
the rental properties resulted from his ex-wife’s failure to apply the rental income to the
mortgages for those properties, and additional expenses incurred by Applicant when he
returned from the west coast to be near his child. Applicant also established that he
began resolving his debts well before the SOR was issued, and that he has, in fact, paid
or otherwise resolved all but two of the debts alleged. Some of the debts he has paid,
as well as one of the remaining debts, were actually assigned to his ex-wife in their
divorce decree. Further, Applicant has no new debt, has paid as agreed all of his legal
fees and child support obligations, and he has a positive cashflow each month. 
Based on all of the foregoing, the record supports application of the mitigating
conditions at AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control); AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts); and AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence
of actions to resolve the issue). 
The ongoing presence of past-due debts requires examination, but it is not the
end of the inquiry into Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Of equal
importance is the manner of Applicant’s response to financial adversity, and his ongoing
management of his personal finances. Applicant acted responsibly to resolve the debts
from his first marriage, his personal and financial circumstances have improved since
his divorce, he is meeting all of his current obligations, and he manages his finances in
a more prudent way so as to avoid such problems in the future. On balance, I conclude
that the security concerns about his unpaid debt are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Available information shows that
Applicant, 33 years old, is a mature, responsible adult. He honorably served his country
in the U.S. Army, and he has established a positive reputation for reliability and
trustworthiness in the company where he has worked for the past two years. His
 See footnote 5, supra.9
8
response to the financial problems from his first marriage reflects sound judgment and
reliability, and his changed circumstances indicate that the adverse circumstances
examined through his background investigation and subsequent adjudication are not
likely  to recur. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information9
bearing on Applicant’s past and current circumstances shows he has addressed
satisfactorily the Government’s doubts about his ability and willingness to protect the
Government’s interests as his own. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
