                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-07229 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86) on 
October 25, 2007. On March 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines D (sexual behavior) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
On March 30, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 30, 2010, was provided to him, and he was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. The DOHA transmittal letter is dated June 30, 2010, and Applicant 
received the FORM on July 7, 2010. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit additional information. Applicant 
submitted information within the 30-day time period after receiving a copy of the FORM.  
Findings of Fact 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor.1 He seeks a 
security clearance in conjunction with his employment. He held a high-level security 
clearance from approximately 1986 until August 2006 at which time it was revoked by 
Another Government Agency (AGA), discussed infra. (Items 4 and 6.)  
 
Applicant was married to his first wife from August 1983 to a date uncertain.2 He 
was married to his second wife from June 2000 to June 2006. Those marriages ended 
by divorce. He married for the third time in October 2007. His SF-86 lists one child, a 
21-year-old daughter.  
 
Applicant’s SF-86 does not provide any information regarding his educational 
background. He lists U.S. Army service from June 1985 to June 1991 as an “officer” and 
his status as “active reserve.”  
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
In July 2005, Applicant completed an SF-86 for AGA, and in March 2006 that 
AGA submitted him for access to a higher security level. In May 2006, Applicant was 
interviewed regarding responses he made on his SF-86. The responses in question 
centered on remarks in his SF-86 that noted there were rumors at his previous place of 
1 All background information pertaining to the Applicant was derived from his October 2007 SF-86, unless 
otherwise stated. 
 
2 Applicant’s October 2007 SF-86 did not list the divorce date from his first wife. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
employment regarding his loss of access and that further information about that event 
was available through proper channels.  
 
During that May 2006 interview, Applicant revealed that in late 2004, he 
videotaped his 14-year-old stepdaughter for his own sexual arousal while she was 
taking a shower. He recounted how he surreptitiously placed a video camera in the 
bathroom just before she entered the bathroom and removed it after she left the 
bathroom. He further admitted that he masturbated while watching the videotape and 
later hid the tape. He claimed his obsession with his stepdaughter began around the 
time she was 12 years old when her body began to develop. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. -1.c., 
Response to SOR).  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
During that May 2006 interview, discussed supra, Applicant admitted that he 
fabricated earlier statements to a security representative that he had thoughts of placing 
bombs in buildings as an attempt to divert attention from the issue surrounding his 
stepdaughter. (SOR ¶ 2.a., Response to SOR.) In August 2006, the AGA revoked 
Applicant’s program access for sexual behavior and personal conduct concerns. (SOR 
¶ 2.b.) Applicant also revealed during this interview that the information regarding his 
stepdaughter was forwarded to his state child protection office and local sheriff’s office. 
The sheriff’s office confiscated his computer and video equipment and returned the 
items once their investigation was closed. However, the state child protection office held 
a separate hearing and found probable cause for child abuse. (SOR ¶ 2.e.) 
 
In October 2007, he completed an SF-86 for a DoD clearance. He was 
interviewed on two separate occasions in November 2008 and January 2009. During 
the second interview, he submitted a signed, sworn statement. During both interviews, 
Applicant was asked to provided clarification and the circumstances surrounding his 
access denial and security clearance revocation in August 2006. On both occasions 
Applicant refused to disclose material facts to the investigator and stated that the issues 
surrounding this event were in the past, and he chose not to revisit these events further. 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.c. and 2.d.) Applicant later explained that he was under the impression the 
facts surrounding the incident with his stepdaughter were well known to DoD. He further 
stated that he was uncomfortable when discussing facts he believed were well 
documented while in his place of business. This discomfort caused him to be less than 
forthcoming. He added that it was never his intent to hinder the investigative process 
and offered his sincere apology for that perception. (Response to FORM.) 
 
Applicant stated in his January 2009 interview that he sought professional help 
from approximately 2005 to 2007 and had provided his medical and mental health 
counselor records during his previous background investigation with AGA. (Item 4.) The 
FORM does not contain any of those records. He also stated in that interview that his 
family and spouse are aware of the details surrounding the denial of his August 2006 
access denial. His co-workers are aware that his clearance had been revoked and 
stated that he cannot be coerced in any way as a result of past actions. (Item 4.)  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for sexual behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 The Guideline lists two applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; and 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.c. Under Guideline D, the evidence 
supports application of sexual behavior disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(c). 
The evidence further supports that the acts occurred as alleged and clearly shows that 
Applicant’s conduct lacked discretion or judgment. Additionally, there is no evidence in 
the FORM from a medical professional that supports Applicant’s assertion that this 
behavior is behind him and that he is not vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 The Guideline lists four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14: 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 The sexual behavior spanned a period of at least two years from 2002 to 2004 
while Applicant was a mature adult. His conduct violated the trust of his spouse and 
stepdaughter. It casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. The behavior was non-consensual and serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, and duress. Applicant did not present evidence sufficient to warrant full 
application of any sexual behavior mitigating conditions. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline lists two applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, . . . . 
 The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a. – 2.e. His concealment or omission of relevant 
facts throughout the background investigation process, questionable judgment, and 
conduct as a whole, establishes AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e)(1). Apart from his assertions, 
there is no evidence in the record that his past conduct and lack of judgment could not 
subject him to vulnerability or exploitation. His conduct is extremely embarrassing and 
public disclosure would affect his personal, professional, or community standing. 
The Guideline lists seven mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
I considered all Guideline E mitigating conditions and conclude that none fully 
apply. Applicant’s conduct spans a significant period of time. Furthermore there is no 
evidence in the FORM, apart from his assertions, that he has sought professional help 
to address the sexual behavior concerns. His favorable information is not sufficient to 
fully apply any of the mitigating conditions. For the reasons outlined under the 
discussions of Guidelines D and E, I conclude Applicant’s behavior shows questionable 
judgment, lack of reliability, and untrustworthiness.  
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not 
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In 
reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and 
that analysis does not support a favorable decision. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c. – 2.d.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
