 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-08493 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 25, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 3, 2010. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on May 6, 2010. The case was assigned to me on May 28, 2010. 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 4, 2010, scheduling the hearing for June 29, 
2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until July 14, 2010, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted AE B through AE G, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.l., 1.p. through 1.q., and denied 1.m. 
through 1.o. His answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old aviation electronics technician, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since February 2009. He seeks a secret security clearance, which 
is a requirement of his continued employment. He previously held a security clearance 
while he was on active duty in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. He has never had a 
security violation, on active duty or as a civilian employee. (GE 1, Tr. 26-27.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1995. He has completed “several 
college-level courses” since graduating from high school. He also attended various 
Navy service schools and job-related training courses. (GE 1, Tr. 28-30.) 
 
Applicant served in the Navy from July 1998 to July 2006, and was honorably 
discharged as an aviation electronics technician second class (pay grade E-5). During 
his Navy career, he went on two deployments to the Middle East. (GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 24-
26.) 
 
Applicant is currently unmarried. He was married the first time from December 
1996 to June 1998, and was married a second time from December 1999 to June 
2007. Both marriages ended by divorce.  
 
Applicant has two children: a 14-year-old daughter born during his first 
marriage, and a 6-year-old daughter born during his second marriage. His first wife’s 
parents have custody of his older daughter, and his second wife has custody of his 
younger daughter. He pays $210 and $250, respectively, in child support for each 
daughter. (GE 1, Tr. 18-24.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his June 2009 e-QIP, his February 2010 Responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories, as well as his July 2009 and February 2010 credit reports. The SOR 
identified 16 separate debts and a 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (GE 1 – 4; SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.q.) 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in November 2000, and was 
awarded a discharge in February 2001. He filed for bankruptcy protection while 
married to his first wife to recover from pre-service debt “and [to] just start over again.” 
(Tr. 51-52.) His debts primarily consist of credit card debt and debts related to 
maintaining a household. Before the hearing, Applicant settled and paid the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m. through 1.o. (Response to SOR, GE 2, Tr. 57, 60.)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the costs associated with his 
second divorce, being unemployed from August 2007 to November 2007, and being 
underemployed from November 2007 to February 2009. It was not until he began 
working for his present employer that he was able to earn a “living wage.” His annual 
salary is $52,000. When he was unemployed and underemployed, he used his credit 
cards to bridge his income gap. He remained in contact with his creditors. (Tr. 28, 61-
66.) 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted documentation that he had sought the 
services of a debt consolidation firm (DCF). The DCF provided Applicant with financial 
counseling, developed a budget for him, and enrolled his debts in a 36-month 
repayment plan. Applicant provided documentation that he is making monthly 
payments to the DCF by direct debit. (AE C through AE G.) Additionally, he has kept 
his supervisor apprised of his situation. (Tr. 57.) 
 
Applicant’s budget, although strained, reflects that he maintains a modest 
lifestyle and is able to “keep his head above water.” He has little discretionary income 
left over after paying all of his monthly expenses and child support for two children 
living in separate households. He envisions his career with his company as upwardly 
mobile. (AE D.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors, resolved, or intends to resolve all debts alleged. Given his resources, it 
appears he is doing as well as can be expected and has addressed the majority of his 
debts. He remains current on the rest of his monthly bills.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a reference letter from his supervisor. His supervisor 
discussed Applicant’s performance and character. In particular, his supervisor stated 
that Applicant “has displayed true professionalism and passion for his trade.” With 
 
4 
 
 
regard to his supervisor’s assessment of Applicant’s suitability for a clearance, his 
supervisor stated, “there is no doubt in my mind that [Applicant] would never be 
considered a risk for negotiating secret information for financial gain.” His supervisor 
expressed familiarity with his financial situation and noted that he is doing everything 
reasonably possible to address his financial situation. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.p., he had 16 delinquent debts 
that have been in various states of delinquency for at least several years. Additionally, 
he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2000. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under 
AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” See  ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives credit because his divorce-related costs, 
unemployment and underemployment were largely beyond his control, and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Even though he did not have the funds for full 
repayment, he did remain in contact with his creditors during this timeframe.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant sought financial counseling. The 
DCF assisted Applicant in developing a plan to effectively manage his money as well 
as developing a viable budget. Applicant produced evidence that he is living within his 
means and is on the road to regaining financial solvency.  
 
Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(d).2 Applicant has paid, is paying, or attempting to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
is not applicable because Applicant did not dispute the validity of any of his debts. The 
2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing lacks security significance because of the passage of 
time.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists 16 
debts that were at one time or another in various states of delinquency, as well as a 
2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current 
or negotiate lesser payments, showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. 
His lack of success in resolving delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security 
concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of eight years of honorable military service, family involvement, and 
good employment with a defense contractor weighs in his favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation during the time Applicant has held a security clearance. He is 
a law-abiding citizen. Although he is not debt-free, there is sufficient evidence that he 
is putting forth his best effort, given the resources available to him. I did not detect any 
recalcitrance or reluctance on his part to address his past debts. On the contrary, 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant views this process seriously and recognizes his failure to regain financial 
responsibility can adversely affect his future employment. His monthly expenses are 
current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases, stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He has put forth a noteworthy effort to resolve his debts and has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt payments. These factors show responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.q.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
