 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03003 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 16, 2009. On 
April 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 13, 2010; answered it on May 4, 2010; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
 
2 
 
 
10, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 30, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to an administrative judge on July 7, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 21, 2010, scheduling it for August 31, 2010. The case was reassigned 
to me on August 19, 2010, to resolve a scheduling conflict. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 23 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel also submitted a demonstrative exhibit summarizing the 
Government evidence, which was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until 
September 17, 2010, to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. 
She did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 8, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor providing security 
alarm monitoring. She has worked for her current employer since October 2008. She 
has never married, but she has a 36-year-old son. She has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant worked as an emergency-call operator for a local police department 
from March 1987 to October 1996. She was terminated after a personal dispute with her 
supervisor. (Tr. 43.) After moving to another state and being unemployed for about six 
months, she was hired to perform maintenance at a condominium. She began working 
as a security operator in March 1999. She was laid off when the company reorganized 
in October 2005. She also worked part-time as a head cook from April 2005 to May 
2008, at about half her pay as a security operator. She was rehired for a security job by 
her previous employer in October 2007, and she worked there until she began her 
current job in October 2008. During her periods of unemployment and 
underemployment she fell behind on her house payments, car payments, and credit 
card payments. (GX 1 at 11-13; GX 3 at 3; Tr. 43-48.) 
 
 Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2007. It was 
dismissed in March 2008 for failure to make the payments required by the bankruptcy 
plan. (GX 12, 13, and 14.) Applicant filed a second petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
July 2008. The petition was dismissed in August 2008 for failure to file the required 
documents. (GX 9, 10, and 11.) The court records reflect that Applicant completed the 
required counseling for both bankruptcy filings. The two bankruptcy filings are alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
 
 In addition to the two bankruptcy filings, the SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts 
totaling more than $100,000. Applicant’s home was foreclosed and the property was 
sold, but she does not know if she owes a deficiency. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
 
3 
 
 
and 1.e are the first and second mortgages on the home, in the amounts of $46,640 and 
$5,910 respectively.  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($49) was for a book ordered by her roommate in her 
name. Applicant has not paid the debt or disputed it. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g ($8,968) is for a deficiency and related charges 
after Applicant’s car was repossessed. It was included in Applicant’s 2007 bankruptcy 
petition, and it is unresolved. (GX 13.) 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h-1.j, and 1.l-1.q were included in the two 
bankruptcies that were dismissed. (GX 13 and 14) The debts are unresolved. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a judgment for state taxes that was filed in July 
1998, before Applicant’s two bankruptcy filings. (GX 21.) It is unresolved. 
 
Applicant has been receiving medical treatment for adult attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder and a depressive disorder since 2007. Her doctor continues to 
see her on a regular basis, and believes she is doing well in treatment. Her doctor has 
found her to be a caring, conscientious, reliable, hard-working person. (AX C.) 
 
As of the date of her hearing, Applicant was current on her rent payments and 
utility bills. She had $7 in her savings account and her checking account was 
overdrawn. She has no credit cards. She drives a 15-year-old car that is paid for. After 
paying her living expenses, she has a net monthly remainder of about $100 to $200. 
(Tr. 55-56, 75.) 
 
In her responses to DOHA interrogatories, her answer to the SOR, and at the 
hearing, Applicant has repeatedly expressed her intention to resolve her delinquent 
debts. (GX 2; GX 3 at 3; Answer to SOR at 4; Tr. 92-94.) As of the date the record 
closed, the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR remained unresolved.  
 
A retired law enforcement officer who has known Applicant for eight years as a 
friend and neighbor regards her as hard working, loyal, dedicated, and patriotic. He is 
aware that she has serious financial problems. (AX B.)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor has known her for 11 years. Applicant had worked for the 
same supervisor at another security company, and her supervisor recruited her for her 
current job because of her good character and trustworthiness. She recently promoted 
Applicant to a supervisory position because of her dependability. Her supervisor was 
generally aware of her financial problems, and she hoped that the promotion would help 
Applicant resolve her financial problems. The supervisor has no hesitation in 
recommending Applicant for a clearance. (Tr. 81-84.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
 
5 
 
 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”), shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
ongoing, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s loss of employment in 
1996 was caused in large part by her conduct. Furthermore, she has not acted 
responsibly to resolve her delinquent debts. She has been continuously employed for 
three years, since October 2007, but she has made virtually no progress in resolving 
her financial problems. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
completed the required counseling in connection with her bankruptcy petitions, but this 
mitigating condition is not established because her financial problems are not under 
control.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is not established 
because there is no evidence of payments or other resolution of her delinquent debts. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has admitted all the debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. All the evidence indicates that 
she sincerely wishes to right her financial ship, but she has not gone beyond promises 
and good intentions. She does not have a plan for resolving her problems. Her 
supervisor’s strong endorsement and demonstration of trust in Applicant is impressive, 
but it is not enough to overcome the security concerns raised by Applicant’s long history 
of financial neglect. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
