 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05212 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
June 14, 2010, and reassigned to me on June 18, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on July 28, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 18, 
2010. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 26, 2010.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted written requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Jordan and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Applicant did not 
object to either request, and they were approved. The requests and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through K, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He seeks a security clearance so that he can work as a 
linguist in Iraq. He was born in Jordan. He has a bachelor’s degree from a Jordanian 
university. He was married from 1991 to 2003. He married his current wife in 2003. He 
has two children from his first marriage, ages 18 and 16. He has a five-year-old child 
with his current wife.1 
 
 Applicant served in the Jordanian military for five years in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Jordan has mandatory military service for two years. Applicant agreed to serve five 
years in order to gain certain benefits not available to the two-year enlistees. He worked 
for a Jordanian government agency from 1993 to 2000. The government agency was 
unrelated to defense and intelligence. He lived in the UAE from 2000 to 2003, and 
worked for a business owned by one of the sheikhs. He was separated from his first 
wife while he was in the UAE. She remained in Jordan. He met his future wife, a U.S. 
citizen, while he was working in the UAE. She was temporarily working in the UAE. He 
returned to Jordan after the business was sold. He and his first wife divorced. Applicant 
and his wife married in Jordan in 2003. He immigrated to the United States in 2003 and 
became a U.S. citizen in 2007. He has not formally renounced his Jordanian citizenship 
through the Jordanian government, but he destroyed his Jordanian passport and 
considers himself solely a U.S. citizen.2 
 
 Applicant worked as a linguist for a defense contractor in Iraq from 2006 to 2007. 
He was exposed to improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mortar attacks. He 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 38, 45-46, 53; GE 1-4. 
 
2 Tr. at 39-49, 61-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE K. 
 
3 
 
returned to the United States after about three months because he injured himself 
carrying gear, requiring surgery.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents, three siblings, first wife, and his two oldest children are 
Jordanian citizens and residents. He has a sibling who is a Jordanian citizen and a 
resident of Qatar. He also has a sibling who is a Jordanian citizen and a resident of the 
UAE.4  
 
 Applicant’s father is retired from a non-government industry. His mother does not 
work outside the home. Applicant’s 18-year-old child has worked various odd jobs. His 
16-year-old child is a student. One sibling in Jordan owns a shop. Applicant’s sibling in 
the UAE used to work in a hotel. Applicant is unsure what the sibling currently does for 
a living. His sibling in Qatar works for a school. One of Applicant’s sisters is single. She 
lives with Applicant’s parents. One of his sisters is married to a lawyer with a private 
practice. None of Applicant’s family members work for, or are associated with, any 
terrorist organization or the governments of Jordan, Qatar, or the UAE.5 
 
 Applicant talks to his children in Jordan about once a month. He talks to his 
parents every other month. He rarely talks to any of his siblings. He has little to no 
contact with any of his friends that are still Jordanian citizens and residents.6  
 
 Applicant has not returned to the UAE since he left in 2003. He has visited 
Jordan three times since he immigrated to the United States. Applicant and his wife own 
a home in the United States. They have various U.S. investments and retirement 
accounts. He has no foreign assets. At one time, Applicant expected to inherit property 
in Jordan. However, he gave up his inheritance rights when he became a U.S. citizen, 
and his father has sold the property. Applicant considers the United States his home. 
He has no plans to move back to Jordan or any other country. Applicant credibly 
testified that he would report to security personnel any attempt to use his family against 
him.7 
  
 Applicant submitted numerous character letters, and three witnesses, including 
his wife, testified on his behalf. The witnesses and the authors of the letters praised 
Applicant’s dependability, trustworthiness, honesty, common sense, reliability, 
judgment, responsibility, integrity, sense of duty and honor, and his love of America.8 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 36-37, 67-68; GE 1-4. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 53-55, 58, 66-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-38. 
 
7 Tr. at 29-30, 34, 39, 48-51, 68-69, 77; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
8 Tr. at 16-35; AE A-J. 
 
4 
 
Jordan 
 
 Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern 
infrastructure. Jordan has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close 
relations with the United States for six decades.  
 
The Jordanian government respects human rights in some areas, but its overall 
record continues to reflect some problems. Problems include: torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement on citizens’ privacy rights, 
political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, 
and movement.  
 
Under Jordanian law, any male relative may prevent a woman or child from 
leaving Jordan by placing a hold on their travel with the Jordanian authorities, even if 
they are U.S. citizens. Jordanian law applies to dual U.S.-Jordanian citizens. 
 
The Jordanian government publicly condemned terrorist acts throughout the 
world, practiced strict security measures, passed new anti-terror legislation, and 
disrupted several terrorist plots. Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, the 
threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist activities 
against Jordan and U.S. interests in Jordan. Terrorist organizations have targeted the 
United States for intelligence through human espionage and by other means. 
International terrorist groups have conducted intelligence operations as effectively as 
state intelligence services. 
 
United Arab Emirates 
 
The UAE is a federation of emirates, each with its own ruler. The federal 
government is a constitutional republic, headed by a president and council of ministries. 
Traditional rule in the UAE is generally patriarchal with political allegiance defined in 
terms of loyalty to tribal leaders. There are no democratically elected legislative 
institutions or political parties, and no general elections. Only 15-20% of the UAE’s 
population are UAE citizens. The remaining population includes significant numbers of 
other Arabs, including many Iranians. The government of UAE has expressed fears that 
the large Iranian – origin community in the Dubai emirate could pose a threat to UAE 
stability. 
 
There are problems in the UAE with regard to human rights, including, arbitrary 
arrests and indefinite incommunicado detention, government restriction on civil liberties, 
a lack of judicial independence, political organizations and political parties. Labor unions 
are illegal and private associations must follow censorship guidelines and receive 
governmental approval before anything is published.  
 
The UAE does not recognize dual nationality, and UAE authorities have 
confiscated U.S. passports of dual nationals.  
 
 
5 
 
The United States and the UAE have had friendly relations since 1971. The UAE 
contributes to the continued security of the Persian Gulf, and is a partner against 
terrorism. However, the UAE is one of only three countries that recognized the Taliban 
as the legitimate government of Afghanistan and two of the September 11, 2001, 
hijackers were from the UAE. The UAE’s cooperation in counterterrorism operations to 
target persons suspected of smuggling cash from terrorist-source countries has been 
met with resistance. Dubai, in the UAE, has been the key transfer point for illicit sales of 
nuclear technology to Iran, Libya, and North Korea. There have also been cases of 
illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to the 
UAE, including products with potential nuclear and military applications. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
6 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has immediate family members and friends who are citizens and 
residents of Jordan. He has a sibling who is a Jordanian citizen and a resident of the 
UAE. He also has a sibling who is a Jordanian citizen and a resident of Qatar. Jordan 
and the UAE continue to have human rights issues, and they both have been victimized 
by terrorists. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
 
 
7 
 
  Applicant traveled to Jordan three times since he immigrated to the United 
States. That is evidence of his ties and affection for his family. It does not establish any 
disqualifying conditions not already addressed by other allegations.9 SOR ¶ 1.h is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Applicant served in the Jordanian military and worked for a Jordanian 
government agency before he immigrated to the United States and became a U.S. 
citizen. That information is relevant and adds context to Applicant’s foreign ties, but it 
does not raise any independent Foreign Influence security concerns. SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j 
are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  It has not been established that Applicant expects to inherit an interest in land in 
Jordan. SOR ¶ 1.k is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has immediate family members in Jordan and the UAE. Those 
countries have continuing human rights and terrorist concerns. Because of the nature of 
those governments and the terrorist concerns, I am unable to find AG ¶ 8(a) applicable.  
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 2003, and he has been a U.S. 
citizen since 2007. His wife is a U.S. citizen, and his youngest child was born in the 
United States. He served the Iraqi mission in 2006 to 2007. He served in a combat zone 
and was subject to IEDs and mortar attacks. He credibly testified that he would report to 
security officials any attempt to use his family members against him. The Appeal Board 
has stated that such testimony, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is record 
evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in comparable 
circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of complying with 
security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.10 In 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). 
 
10 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
8 
 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find, because of Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in America, that he can 
be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG 
¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
9 
 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his service in Iraq. I 
also considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Jordan, Qatar, and the UAE. 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States 
has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any 
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”11 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be 
made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that he would report 
any attempt to use his family members to coerce him to reveal classified information. 
The Appeal Board has held that “generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, 
as to what he would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are 
entitled to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”12 Jordan has had close relations with the United States 
for six decades. The United States and the UAE have had friendly relations since 1971. 
However, both Jordan and the UAE have human rights and terrorism issues. The 
complicated state of affairs in those countries places a significant burden of persuasion 
on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign family members do not pose an 
unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
12 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
