 
1 
 
 
                                                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
  ) 
       )   ISCR Case No. 09-05663 
                                                                      )                                                   
                                                            )                                                                                          
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and the whole-person analysis.  His eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on 
September 27, 2006. On March 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 14, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 20, 
 
2 
 
 
2010. Applicant and Department Counsel agreed to a hearing, and on October 18, 
2010, I convened a hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called 
one witness and introduced eleven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 11 and 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called no witnesses, and introduced no 
exhibits. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 27, 2010. 
 
          Procedural Matters  
 
 The Government moved to restyle the caption in the case to include Applicant’s 
middle name. Applicant did not object, and the caption was restyled accordingly. (Tr. 8-
9.) 
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.e.). Applicant denied, in general, that the conduct alleged on the SOR 
demonstrated questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged that 
Applicant was terminated by an employer in June 2003. SOR ¶ 1.b. alleged that 
Applicant failed to list his June 2003 job termination on the SF-86 he completed and 
signed on September 27, 2006. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c. alleged that Applicant failed to disclose the June 2003 termination to 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator during his security clearance 
interview on June 26, 2007, until after he was confronted by the investigator. SOR ¶ 1.d. 
alleged that in about September 2007, Applicant was denied a security clearance by 
another government agency for failure to provide truthful answers on his security 
clearance application and during his interview with an authorized OPM investigator. 
SOR ¶ 1.e. alleged that Applicant falsified material facts on his September 27, 2006, 
security clearance application when, in response to Section 22, he deliberately failed to 
disclose that he had been terminated by his employer in June 2003. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d. He denied the 
SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.e. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of 
fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 49 years old, is married and the father of two sons, aged 20 
and 16. He earned an undergraduate degree in business administration in 1985. During 
his undergraduate years, Applicant was enrolled for an unspecified time in the Reserve 
Officer Training Corps (ROTC) and was awarded a security clearance in 1983. He did 
not serve on active duty. In 1992, Applicant was awarded a Master of Arts in Business 
Administration. He is currently employed as a business developer. (Ex. 1 at 9-10; Tr. 
51-54.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 From 1996 until June 2003, Applicant was employed as a territory sales manager 
by a manufacturing business. He excelled in his work, which included providing discount 
incentives to distributers who promoted and sold the products manufactured by his 
employer. In 2001 and 2002, his employer ranked him first among 56 territory sales 
managers. He was responsible for documenting and keeping track of how much of the 
employer’s product was sold by each of several hundred clients in his territory. 
Applicant was authorized to approve invoices for receipt of financial incentives 
submitted by distributers, jobbers, or retailers. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3, 11-13; Tr. 55-57.)  
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged that, as the result 
of an allegation made by his employer, he was the subject of an inquiry by the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in October 2005. Applicant’s employer alleged that 
Applicant colluded with one of the distributors in his territory to receive kickbacks by 
inflating the distributor’s promotion numbers. Applicant denied the allegation and stated 
that no charges resulted from the FBI inquiry. His employer fired him in June 2003. 
Applicant felt that his employer had wronged him and that the firing had no merit. (Ex. 2 
at 3; Ex. 3.) 
  
 From October 2005 until September 2007, Applicant was employed by three 
government contractors to conduct background investigations for a federal agency. 
Applicant initially completed an SF-86 in 2005. On that form he denied being fired from 
a job. In April 2006, Applicant again completed an SF-86 after he was hired to work as a 
full-time contract investigator. Section 22 on the SF-86 asked the following question 
about Applicant’s employment record: 
 
 Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years: 
  
 1. Fired from a job. 
 
 2. Quit a job after being told you’d be fired. 
 
 3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct? 
 
 4. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory 
           performance? 
 
 5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances? 
 
Applicant responded “No” to each of the five questions in Section 22. (Ex. 1 at 28; Ex. 3 
at 9; Tr. 54-55, 81.) 
 
 On June 26, 2007, Applicant was interviewed under oath by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). The investigator 
appeared as a Government witness and affirmed the facts in her report of investigation. 
In her testimony, the investigator stated that in her interview with Applicant she had 
asked him three times to explain why he left his employment in June 2003. Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
responded that the company where he was employed was in turmoil over a leveraged 
buyout and he therefore left the company and started his own business. Applicant 
further told the investigator that he left the company under favorable terms. He stated 
that since the company was no longer in existence, he could not speculate whether he 
would be eligible for rehire. (Ex. 2 at 1; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 The investigator then asked Applicant more about the circumstances associated 
with leaving his job in June 2003. She asked him if he gave notice, if the employer 
raised issues or concerns about Applicant’s behavior or conduct, if he had any 
personality conflicts with the employer, or if he had been accused or suspected of any 
questionable, improper, or unethical behavior. Applicant responded by repeating his 
previous assertions that he had left under favorable circumstances to start his own 
business. (Ex. 2 at 1; Tr. 27-30.) 
 
 The investigator then asked Applicant about the FBI inquiry in 2005. He stated 
that he could not recall the specific questions or concerns raised by the FBI 
investigators. After two attempts by the OPM investigator to elicit information about how 
the FBI investigation was related to his conduct or behavior, Applicant speculated that 
the FBI was concerned about information Applicant provided to his employer about a 
distributer’s inventory or promotion count. (Ex. 2 at 2.) 
 
 At the end of the interview, after the investigator had attempted several times to 
ascertain from Applicant specific information about why he left his job, Applicant 
admitted that his employer had given him a written notice of termination in June 2003. 
The investigator asked him several times why he had been fired. Applicant was unable 
to recall when he had been fired. Finally, he acknowledged to the investigator that his 
firing “had something to do with inventory accounting.” He further stated that he 
believed he had done nothing wrong. He stated that his employer was looking for a way 
to terminate his employment. Applicant stated that he believed he had been wronged by 
his employer. He further stated that he did not mention his termination because he did 
not want to call attention to it and “was not going to take a hit for something that was 
unjust, frivolous, and without merit.”1  (Ex. 2 at 3; Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 In September 2007, the federal agency informed Applicant of its final decision to 
remove him as a contract investigator. The agency informed Applicant that he was 
removed, in part, because he falsified his 2006 SF-86 by failing to report he had been 
terminated from a job in 2003. The agency also noted that Applicant failed to 
acknowledge the termination during a security interview until the matter was raised by 
an investigator. Applicant denied that his failure to report the firing constituted 
wrongdoing.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 8; Tr. 54-60.) 
 
 In April 2009, Applicant took a position as a security officer with a government 
contractor, which sponsored him for a security clearance. He completed an SF-86 on 
 
1 The OPM investigator who interviewed Applicant in June 2007 testified that she quoted Applicant 
directly in her June 26, 2007, report of investigation. (Tr. 30-31.) 
 
5 
 
 
April 22, 2009. In response to Section 13C on the SF-86, Applicant admitted being fired 
from a job in June 2003. In explanation, he asserted that allegations of wrongdoing by 
his former employer were false and without merit. (Ex. 11 at 19.) 
 
 The OPM investigator did not obtain and review Applicant’s personnel file before 
interviewing him in June 2007. Applicant claimed that he had worked in the private 
sector for many years and was not familiar with how the security clearance process 
worked. He stated that he answered “No” to questions in Section 22 because he 
believed that if he admitted he had been fired, he would also be admitting to allegations 
of wrongdoing. He also acknowledged that when he completed his SF-86 in 2006, he 
had been working as a contract investigator for the Government for approximately one 
year. He claimed he did not answer the investigator’s inquiries about his job status in 
June 2003, because the investigator did not ask him directly if he had been fired from 
the job. He stated that if the investigator had asked him directly if he had been fired by 
his employer in June 2003, he would have answered, “Yes.” (Tr. 33, 59-62, 65, 74.) 
 
 Applicant provided a letter of character reference from  a neighbor and friend who 
worked in employment security. The individual stated that he believed Applicant to 
possess good character and to be an “honest and trustworthy patriot.” (Ex. 3 at 17.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he was not given enough time to review his 2006 SF-86 
before he resubmitted it. Applicant acknowledged that he made a mistake by not 
admitting on his 2006 SF-86 that he had been fired from a job in June 2003.  (Tr. 75-77, 
81.)    
                                                Policies  
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
6 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.c., which alleged that in a security clearance interview 
he failed to disclose his termination from a job in June 2003. The OPM investigator who 
interviewed Applicant provided credible testimony to establish the Government’s prima 
facie case in allegation 1.c. Applicant provided no credible evidence to rebut or mitigate 
the allegation. Applicant also denied SOR allegation 1.e., which alleged deliberate 
falsification of his SF-86.2 
 
Applicant is educated in and knowledgeable about business and business 
practices. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration and a 
Master of Science degree in Business Administration. He worked in private business 
and was fired from a job in 2003. Beginning in 2005, Applicant worked as a contract 
investigator for a federal agency. His job as an investigator was to interview candidates 
for federal employment and obtain information about issues in their backgrounds that 
might raise trustworthiness concerns. As a contract investigator, Applicant was aware of 
the importance of telling the truth to the Government, and he was also familiar with the 
security significance of questions on the SF-86.   
 
When he completed and certified his SF-86 in September 2006, Applicant 
concealed the fact that he had been fired from a job in June 2003 when he answered 
“No” to the questions in Section 22. In June 2007, when he was interviewed by an 
authorized OPM investigator, he told her that he had left the job under favorable 
circumstances. He continued to dissemble about being fired despite repeated questions 
from the OPM investigator. After repeated denials, he finally admitted that he had been 
 
2 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose past-due debts on a security clearance application was deliberate.) 
 
8 
 
 
fired, but only after he had been confronted by the investigator with facts that convinced 
him that further denials were not credible. At his hearing, he denied dissembling and 
stated that he would have admitted being fired from his job if the investigator had asked 
him directly. Further, he blamed his employer for the firing and stated that he believed 
the firing was not justified. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his answers to 
questions in Section 22 on the SF-86 he executed in September 2006. At his hearing, 
he admitted that he had been fired and should have answered “Yes” when asked in 
Section 22 if he had been fired from a job in the previous seven years. He explained his 
false answer by asserting that he did not have enough time to review his SF-86 before 
submitting it to his employer. Applicant’s explanation was not credible, and he failed to 
provide a credible reason for failing to inform the Government that he had been fired.  
 
  AG ¶ 17 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; [and] 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
No one advised Applicant to provide false information on his SF-86 or to an OPM 
investigator. Therefore, AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. I thoroughly reviewed the 
documentary and testamentary evidence in this case. I observed Applicant carefully, 
and I noted his demeanor and how he responded to questions about his answers to the 
five questions in Section 22 and his interview with an OPM investigator in June 2007. I 
also listened carefully to his responses to questions posed during his security clearance 
hearing in order to assess his credibility and state of mind. I conclude that there is 
sufficient record evidence to conclude that Applicant’s “No” responses to questions in 
Section 22 and his statements to the OPM investigator that he had left his position 
under favorable circumstances were willful and deliberate falsifications. I conclude that 
none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions applies to the facts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. 
and 1.e. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 49 
years. He is educated and experienced in business and business practices. As a 
contract investigator, he was aware that being fired from a job can raise security 
concerns. He also knew that failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
employment investigation process would raise concerns about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
Applicant was not a credible witness. While he admitted he had failed to provide 
full, frank, and truthful answers to the OPM investigator, he also stated he would have 
told the truth to the OPM investigator if she had asked him directly if he had been fired. 
He stated that he would have admitted he had been fired in response to questions in 
Section 22 if he had had more time to review his answers. He blamed his employer for 
firing him and stated that his termination was without merit. I believe Applicant did in fact 
provide the information reported by the OPM investigator in her summary of Applicant’s 
personal subject interview on June 26, 2007.  
 
The false information Applicant provided on his SF-86 and in his interview with 
an OPM investigator is recent and serious. He has not taken responsibility for his failure 
to be candid about his work record. He failed to establish that his dishonesty and lack of 
candor would not recur, raising ongoing concerns about his judgment, trustworthiness, 
and reliability.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I conclude, 
after a careful review of the facts of his case, the personal conduct adjudicative 
guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                    
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
