 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ADP Case No. 09-05294 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
October 22, 2008. On January 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary 
decision to deny her application, citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
DOHA acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on February 28, 2010; answered it on March 12, 
2010; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received 
 
 2
her response on March 15, 2010. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on September 7, 2010. On the same day, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. She received the FORM on September 15, 2010, and did not submit any 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on November 8, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. 
Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has never 
married, but she has two children, ages 19 and 21. She has been eligible for public trust 
positions since January 2003. (Item 4 at 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is about $1,668. Her total monthly living 
expenses are $1,460, including rent of $450. In addition, she has a monthly car 
payment of $329. Even without any unexpected expenses, she has a net monthly 
shortfall of about $121. 
 
 In late 2007 and early 2008, Applicant and her son both required surgery. She 
was on unpaid leave for three weeks as a result of her surgery. She incurred numerous 
medical bills that added to her monthly $121 shortfall. She did not respond to letters 
from creditors. She described herself to a security investigator as “financially tapped 
out.” (Item 5 at 5.) 
 
The SOR alleges 28 delinquent debts, of which 22 are medical bills. Of the 
medical bills, 11 are for less than $100. There is no evidence that Applicant has sought 
credit counseling or other professional assistance, and no evidence that she has 
attempted to negotiate settlements or payment plans on any of the debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that “the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of 
Defense contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
 
 3
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant 
or him or her eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s financial history establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG & 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG & 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Thus, the burden shifted to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.  
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
 
 4
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s debts are numerous, not yet resolved, and there is no 
evidence that they occurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns also may be mitigated if Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ AG & 
20(b). Applicant’s medical expenses were a condition beyond her control, but there is 
no evidence she acted responsibly. She has not sought counseling or other professional 
assistance, she has not contacted her creditors, and she has done nothing to pay, 
compromise, settle, or dispute her debts.  
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence Applicant has 
sought counseling, and her problems are not under control.  
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition 
is not established because there is no evidence of any efforts to resolve the delinquent 
debts. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). 
This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has admitted all the 
debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
 5
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has carried the burden of raising two children 
alone. She has been eligible for public trust positions since January 2003. However, she 
was living paycheck to paycheck before she incurred unexpected medical bills. She has 
not taken any steps to deal with her financial crisis responsibly. Applicant did not 
request a hearing, limiting my ability to assess her sincerity and credibility or to elicit 
more information from her. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial considerations. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue her eligibility for assignment 
to a public trust position.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.bb:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for assignment to a 
public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
