1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-02049
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 10, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on October 6, 2008. (Government Exhibit 3.) On June 30, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) about Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 24, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on November 12, 2009. This case was assigned to me on December 15, 2009.  DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on December 16, 2009, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on January 27, 2010. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1
through 9, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted
2
Applicant Exhibits A through F, which were also received without objection. The record
was left open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On February 18, 2010,
Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit G, which was received without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing on February 12, 2010. Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 50 and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
industry. 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is
financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant admits allegations 1.a. through 1.m. in the SOR. Those
admissions are deemed findings of fact. Applicant denied allegation 1.n. He also
submitted additional statements supporting his request for a security clearance.
The SOR alleges, Applicant admits, and Government exhibits substantiate, 13
delinquent debts totaling approximately $36,997. Some of these debts have been due
and owing since 2005. (Government Exhibits 4, 5, 6 , 7 and 8.)
Applicant testified that has not completely paid off any of the admitted debts. His
specific reasoning for ignoring his financial responsibilities was that he has always been
concerned with his specific job. Regarding his debts he stated, “I have truly not been
focused like I need to and there’s no excuse for that.” (Transcript at 45.) Applicant also
stated that his wife was attempting to handle his finances and pay his bills. (Transcript
at 44-45, 52, 58.) After the hearing, he submitted a copy of a letter he had sent to a law
firm, stating, “Please contact the following creditors on my behalf in an attempt to settle
my debts in a fair and amicable way.” (Applicant Exhibit G at 4-5.) No other
documentation was submitted about the current status of any of the debts. The specific
debts referred to in Applicant Exhibit G are identified below.
1.a. Applicant admits this judgment in the amount of $1,379. He stated that it is
being collected by means of a garnishment. (Government Exhibit 3 at Section 27;
Transcript at 59-62.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.b. Applicant admits this judgment in the amount of $10,931. He stated that it is
being collected by means of a garnishment. (Government Exhibit 3 at Section 27;
Transcript at 59-62.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
3
1.c. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $510. He testified that he could
not state with certainty whether this debt had been paid or not. (Transcript at 63.) It is
not one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.d. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $4,480. He testified that this debt
has not been paid. (Transcript at 63.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit
G.
1.e. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $11,517 for a time share. He
states that his wife is negotiating with the creditor. (Transcript at 55-56.) It is one of the
debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.f. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $89. He testified that he could not
state with certainty whether this debt had been paid or not. (Transcript at 63.) It is not
one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.g. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $2,059. He testified that he could
not state with certainty whether this debt had been paid or not. (Transcript at 63.) It is
one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.h. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $1,637 for a student loan. He
testified that he has been paying some amount of money on his student loans.
(Transcript at 53-55, 57.) It is not one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.i. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $3,086 for a student loan. He
testified that he has been paying some amount of money on his student loans.
(Transcript at 53-55.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.j. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $217 for a student loan. He
testified that he has been paying some amount of money on his student loans.
(Transcript at 53-55.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.k. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $124 for a student loan. He
testified that he has been paying some amount of money on his student loans.
(Transcript at 53-55.) It is one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
1.l. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $421. He testified that he believed
his wife had paid this debt. (Transcript at 64.) It is not one of the debts included in
Applicant Exhibit G. Based on all of the available evidence, I find that this debt is still
due and owing.
1.m. Applicant admits this debt in the amount of $547. He testified that he could
not state with certainty whether this debt had been paid or not. (Transcript at 64.) It is
not one of the debts included in Applicant Exhibit G.
4
1.n. Applicant denied receiving Non-Judicial Punishment in 1996 for Larceny of
Government Funds and Fraud Against the United States, for which he received a
written reprimand. During the hearing, he admitted that this had taken place because he
had failed to notify the Government of a change in his military status that would have
reduced his pay. He acknowledged that this was a mistake on his part, but stated it was
because he was concentrating on the mission, and not through any desire to defraud
the Government of approximately $3,000. (Government Exhibits 1 and 2; Transcript at
29-34.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted letters of recommendation from an officer he serves with and
a senior civilian employee of the Defense Department. Both find him trustworthy and
recommend that he be granted a security clearance. (Applicant Exhibits A and B.)
Applicant is a highly decorated veteran, retiring with the rank of E-7. He received
many decorations for his service of 20 years, which included over nine years of foreign
service. (Applicant Exhibit C.) Since his retirement in 1999, he has held several high-
ranking jobs in the civilian sector, in and out of the defense industry. (Applicant Exhibit
F.) He has been in his current position since 2008, and has taken several courses in his
area. (Applicant Exhibits D and E; Transcript at 24-25.)
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be used in evaluating an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision. In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the
5
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a
determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance. If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government's case. The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that the Applicant has financial difficulties which may affect his ability to
safeguard classified information. The Applicant, on the other hand, has not successfully
mitigated the Government's case.
6
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant, by his own admission, has over $36,000 in past due debts,
all of which have been due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial
difficulties arose recently, starting about 2005, and continue to the present. In addition,
Applicant has failed to provide any evidence that he is paying any of his debts, or has
any reasonable plan to do so. He states that his wife is handling his debts, and
submitted a letter showing that he may be retaining a law firm to resolve them.
However, he submitted no other evidence. I have considered those facts, but find them
wanting due to a lack of forward movement. A mere statement of intent to pay or
resolve his debts in the future is insufficient evidence to conclude that he has acted
responsibly towards his debts. It is Applicant’s burden to submit evidence showing that
his financial situation has improved.  He has not done so.  This mitigating condition is
not applicable to this case.  
Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort to pay off his creditors.  There is no
track record of his making payments, even for the smallest debts.  Accordingly, AG ¶
20(d) is not applicable.  Finally, given the fact that he is $36,000 in debt, I cannot find
that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,”
as required by AG ¶ 20(c).
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is under financial strain,
and has been so for several years. His debt situation is not yet under control. I have
also considered the positive references he submitted, and his laudatory military career.
Those facts are insufficient to support a finding for the Applicant.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s conduct is recent.  Based on the state of the
record, I cannot find that there have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶
2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I find that there is the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8); and that there is a high likelihood of
recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation. If the Applicant is able to resolve his debt situation successfully, he may be
eligible for a security clearance in the future. He is not eligible now.
On balance, I conclude that Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a denial of his request for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.n.: Against the Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
