 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-05781 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 9, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On December 11, 2009, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories. 
He responded to the interrogatories on December 18, 2009.2 On December 31, 2009, 
DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated October 9, 2008. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated December 18, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Access to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006) (AG). The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on an unspecified date before January 13, 2010.3 In 
a sworn, written statement, dated January 8, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 2, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on March 9, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 
18, 2010, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on April 21, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, 4 Government exhibits and 17 Applicant exhibits were 
received without objection. Applicant and one other witness testified. The transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) was received on April 30, 2010. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
On March 2, 2010, Department Counsel requested that the administrative judge 
assigned the case take Administrative Notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to 
the Russian Federation (Russia), appearing in 10 written submissions. On April 14, 
2010, Department Counsel submitted an amended request for administrative notice, 
substituting more recent versions of some of the previously submitted documents. Facts 
are proper for Administrative Notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized 
source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on 
source information regarding Russia in publications of the Department of State;4 the 
Congressional Research Service;5 the Office of the National Counterintelligence 
Executive);6 the Defense Intelligence Agency;7 and the Director of National 
Intelligence.8 
3 The date indicated on the receipt is unclear, but the receipt was received by DOHA in January 13, 2010. 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Background Note: Russia, dated April 
2009; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2009 Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices: Russia, dated March 11, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country 
Specific Information: Russia, dated August 6, 2009; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, Chapter 2. Europe and Eurasia Overview, dated April 30, 
2009; U.S. Department of State, Testimony of Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, before the Senate 
Committee on Armed Services: The Current Situation in Georgia and Implications for U.S. Policy, dated September 9, 
2008. 
 
5 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Russian Political, Economic, and Security Issues 
and U.S. Interests, dated January 29, 2010. 
 
6 Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage, 2005, dated August 2006; and Office of the National Counterintelligence 
Executive, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 2007, dated 
September 10, 2008. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,9 as set 
forth below under the Russia subsection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.d., of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a SECRET security clearance.  He has been employed as an electrical engineer 
by the same government contractor since October 2008.10  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in 197311 to Russian parents residing in Russia.12 After 
graduating from high school, he entered a Russian university, eventually earning a B.S. 
in International Industrial Management and an M.S. in Aerospace Engineering in 
1996.13 He took Army Reserve courses while in school in lieu of active military service 
to satisfy any Russian military requirements.14 During his third year at the university, he 
took English classes taught by American professors, and, for the first time in his life, 
was exposed to American values and liberties.15 In 1994, he came to the United States 
for the first time to visit some former classmates and professors, all of whom were U.S. 
 
7 Defense Intelligence Agency, Director’s Statement before the Senate Committee on Armed Services: 
Annual Threat Assessment, dated March 10, 2009. 
 
8 Director of National Intelligence, Statement before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence: Annual 
Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, dated February 2, 2010. 
 
9 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to 
notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice 
may utilize authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 
(2006) (citing internet sources for numerous documents).   
 
10 Applicant Exhibit F (Letter of President and CEO of Applicant’s employer, dated April 13, 2010). 
 
11 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
12 Id. at 22-23; Tr. at 47. 
 
13 Government Exhibit 1, at 13-14. Applicant also referred to the degree as an M.S. in Aerospace 
Technology. See Tr. at 6, 45. 
 
14 Tr. at 45-48. 
 
15 Id. at 36. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
citizens.16 He stayed for a month.17 He returned to Russia, and, in 1997, assisted 
American missionaries in Russia with English-Russian translations.18  
 
In 1998, Applicant returned to the United States, this time for three months to 
visit the missionaries and their daughter.19 He never returned, for he applied for an 
extension of his visa, and a combination of circumstances resulted in his remaining in 
the United States, first as a permanent resident, and then as a U.S. citizen.20 He 
eventually proposed to the daughter, and in March 1999, they were married.21 Applicant 
and his wife have three children: sons born in the United States in 2003, 2005, and 
2009, respectively.22 He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2004.23 
 
 Commencing in 1999, and continuing until his current employment in 2008, 
Applicant started at the bottom. He took whatever work he could get and did several 
low-end jobs, including cleaning toilets and crawling through boat bilges to install 
electronics.24 He also worked as a technical support engineer, an electrical engineer, 
and electronics specialist.25 He continued his education by taking courses at two U.S. 
universities with a goal of eventually earning a degree in electrical engineering.26  
 
Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States,27 and he maintains two 
401(k) plans through his employer.28 His church is here and all of his friends and family 
– his wife’s family, which he considers his family, are in the United States.29 He stated: 
“All my life is here. I don’t have anything back in Russia. I don’t have any real estate, 
any retirement, or any other interests in Russia.”30 He added: I consider myself an 
16 Id. at 37, 42-43. 
 
17 Id. at 43. 
 
18 Id. at 38. 
 
19 Id. at 38, 44. 
 
20 Id. at 44. 
 
21 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 21. 
 
22 Id.; Tr. at 39. 
 
23 Id. Government Exhibit 1, at 7. 
 
24 Tr. at 38. 
 
25 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 15-18. 
 
26 Applicant Exhibit A (University Transcript, dated April 9, 2010); Applicant Exhibit B (University Transcript, 
dated April 9, 2010); Tr. at 39. 
 
27 Applicant Exhibit E (Warranty Deed, dated June 15, 2009). 
 
28 Applicant Exhibit C (Retirement Savings Plan, dated March 31, 2010); Applicant Exhibit D (Retirement 
Plan, dated March 31, 2010). 
 
29 Tr. at 39. 
 
30 Id.; See also Id. at 54. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
American. I don’t think of myself as a Russian. . . .”31 His ultimate loyalty is to the United 
States, and he feels no allegiance or obligation to Russia.32 He stated:33 
 
I am proud to be an American. I consider it’s a privilege to live here in this 
country and enjoy all the God-given freedoms that we have, and just 
proud also to be able to work in a place where I make some difference . . , 
a positive difference in the safety of this country. 
 
And referring to his children, Applicant stated: “. . . they are Americans one hundred 
percent, they don’t even speak Russian, and they don’t know any other life than this.”34  
 
Applicant’s parents were divorced when he was seven years old.35 His nearly 80-
year-old father, a Russian citizen and resident, was born in 1931.36 He is a retired 
mechanical engineer, formerly with a Russian governmental research institute.37 The 
father served in the Russian Army for about five years.38 He has no current relationship 
with the Russian government, military, or intelligence services. Following his parents’ 
divorce, Applicant saw his father “maybe once a month” when he Applicant was a 
child.39 He characterizes their relationship as “not really that close,” although he 
acknowledges that he loves his father.40 Since leaving Russia permanently, Applicant 
has seen his father on two occasions,41 and speaks with him by telephone once every 
two months or when there is a birthday.42 His father does not have e-mail.43 They last 
spoke about two months before the hearing.44 
 
 
31 Id. 
 
32 Personal Subject Interview, dated June 9, 2009, attached to Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
33 Tr. at 41.  
 
34 Id. at 39. 
 
35 Id. at 56. 
 
36 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 23. 
 
37 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 32, at 2. 
 
38 Id. 
 
39 Tr. at 56, 59. 
 
40 Id. at 59. 
 
41 Id. at 56. 
 
42 Id. at 59. 
 
43 Id. at 58. 
 
44 Id. at 57. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
ear.  
                                                          
Applicant’s nearly 70-year-old mother, a Russian citizen and resident, is an 
assistant plant manager for a manufacturing company, and was, until sometime 
between 1988 and 1990, a mechanical engineer at the same Russian governmental 
research institute with which his father was associated.45 At the time, she did design 
research for the Russian military.46 She has no current relationship with the Russian 
government, military, or intelligence services. After his parents’ divorce, Applicant 
resided with his mother and older sister.47 Since leaving Russia permanently, Applicant 
has seen his mother on two occasions when she visited the United States for a few 
weeks in 2006 and close to a month in 2009.48 They also visited when Applicant 
traveled to Russia in 2003, 2006, and 2007, and stayed with his mother.49 Applicant and 
his mother have nearly monthly contact by telephone and less frequent contact by e-
mail.50  
 
Applicant’s 43-year-old unmarried sister, a Russian citizen and resident, was 
born in 1967.51 She has been a librarian at a Russian university nearly all of her life, 
and has resided with her mother since her parents’ divorce.52 Applicant characterizes 
his relationship with his sister as “not really that close.53 She has no other relationship 
with the Russian government, military, or intelligence services. They rarely speak, 
except when Applicant calls on her birthday each y 54
 
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2004, Applicant 
maintained his Russian passport that had been renewed in 2004 and again in 2007, and 
he actually used it on occasion, solely for convenience.55 When a possible issue or 
concern arose regarding his retention of the Russian passport, Applicant had no 
reservations or reluctance to surrender it.56 That passport was destroyed at Applicant’s 
request by his employer’s facility security officer in October 2009.57  
45 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 32, at 2; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 22. 
 
46 Id. 
 
47 Tr. at 60. 
 
48 Id. at 55. 
 
49 Id. at 65-67. 
 
50 Id. at 57. 
 
51 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 24-25. 
 
52 Tr. at 58, 60. 
 
53 Id. at 56. 
 
54 Id. at 58. 
 
55 Id. at 48, 55; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 32, at 4; See also, Applicant’s corrections to his Personal 
Subject Interview, at para. 4, wherein he stated the most recent renewal occurred in 2007. 
 
56 Tr. at 49. 
 
57 Government Exhibit 3 (Statement from FSO, dated October 26, 2009); Tr. at 49. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
When Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance 
to the United States.  That oath included the words:58 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen. 
. . .  
 
While he has personally renounced his Russian citizenship emotionally and under U.S. 
law,59 he has not formally relinquished it under Russian law as it is a long and costly 
process, requiring that he return to Russia, with a valid Russian passport, to do so. 
However, he is willing to commence the process, if necessary.60 
 
Character References 
 
 The President/CEO of Applicant’s employer not only offered written support for 
Applicant, but also testified on his behalf. He, the former Vice President for Joint 
Programs, the Chief Financial Officer, the FSO, the Deputy Program Manager, and 
several co-workers, are highly supportive of Applicant’s application for a security 
clearance. Based on their relationship with him, and observation of him, they have 
characterized him with the following common terms: integrity, character, trustworthy, 
loyal, religious, respectful, forthright, dedicated, exemplary, exceptionally diligent, 
professional, devoted, humble, and fair. His pastor, a former supervisor from a previous 
employer, as well as a current government “client” are, likewise effusive in their support 
for his application.61 
 
Russia 
 
Russia is composed of 21 republics. The Government consists of a strong 
president, a prime minister, a bicameral legislature, and a weak judiciary often subject 
to political manipulation. It is a vast and diverse country with a population of 142 million 
people. It achieved independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 
1991, and remains a nuclear superpower that continues to develop politically, socially, 
and economically. On paper, Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international 
human rights standards, but it continues to be a “police state” where human rights 
abuses are rampant. There are numerous reports of human rights abuses, including law 
enforcement personnel engaged in torture, abuse, and violence to coerce confessions 
from suspects, with little accountability, despite the fact that the law prohibits such 
practices; widespread corruption within the police force; arbitrary arrest and detention; 
politically motivated arrests; abductions; and life threatening prison conditions. The 
58 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
59 Tr. at 40. 
 
60 Id. at 50, 53-54. 
 
61 Id. at 26-35; Applicant Exhibits F through Q (Character References, various dates). 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
media is largely state-controlled. There are restrictions on freedom of movement within 
the country, and all adults must carry government-issued internal passports while 
traveling internally, and they are required to register with the local authorities within a 
specified time of their arrival at a new location. 
 
Russia’s two main intelligence services are the Russian Foreign Intelligence 
Service (SVR) and the main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff (GRU), both 
overseen by the Russian National Security Council and coordinated through the 
Permanent Interbranch Commissions of the National Security. Its intelligence capability 
is significant and focuses on collection of information from the United States. The Soviet 
Union engaged in a series of high profile espionage missions against the United States, 
and Russia has continued the tradition. Russia is one of the two most aggressive 
collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounts for the majority of 
such targeting. Russia also provides technologies which could be used in the 
construction of weapons of mass destruction and missiles to other countries. It is a 
leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related 
technology to China, India, Iran, and Venezuela.  Nevertheless, the United States and 
Russia share common interests on a broad range of issues, including counterterrorism 
and the drastic reduction of strategic arsenals. 
 
Russia has attempted to reassert its dominance in, and integration of, the former 
Soviet states and has generally been successful with Belarus and Armenia. It has 
remained unwelcomingly active in the internal affairs of several of its neighboring 
countries—former republics of the Soviet Union or occupied “independent countries”—
such as Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova, and has issued threats against 
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Estonia. 
 
U.S. citizens who have, at one time, held Russian citizenship, may be required to 
renounce Russian citizenship before applying for a Russian visa in their U.S. passport.  
Unless a Russian citizen has formally renounced his or her Russian citizenship, he or 
she risks being considered a Russian citizen and not allowed to depart except on a 
Russian passport. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”62 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”63   
62 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
63 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”64 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.65  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”66 
 
 
 
64 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
65 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
66 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”67 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.68 Applicant’s relationship with his parents and 
sister in Russia, and his travels to Russia, are current concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
67 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
68 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case.  
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his three family members who 
are Russian citizen-residents to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential 
conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows Athere is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.@ In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  In this instance, 
his relationship with those family members is neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, including the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.69  In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”70 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States through the applicant. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly 
relationship, or the existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may 
make it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen 
through relatives or associates in that foreign country. 
 
69 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
70 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
12 
                                      
 
As noted above, since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the United States and 
Russia have developed a closer, less confrontational, relationship. Nevertheless, 
Russia continues to be a “police state” where human rights abuses are rampant, with 
little accountability. Russia has been one of the two most aggressive collectors of 
sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounts for the majority of such targeting.  
Russia’s relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. The complicated relationship of Russia to the 
United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his parents and sister in Russia do not pose a security 
risk and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and those family members. With its occasionally adversarial stance and its mixed 
human rights record, it is conceivable that Russia could target any citizen in an attempt 
to gather information from the United States. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s parents or sisters are, or have been, 
political activists, challenging the policies of the Russian Government. There is no 
evidence that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his parents or sister 
for any reason. There is no evidence the Russian Government has approached 
Applicant. There is no evidence that his parents or sister currently engage in activities 
that would bring attention to themselves or that they are even aware of Applicant’s work. 
As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be targets for coercion or 
exploitation by the Russian Government, which may seek to quiet those who speak out 
against it.  He has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that those 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. I find AG ¶ 8(a) 
applies in this case.  
 
Applicant has been a resident of the United States since 1998. He married a 
native-born U.S. citizen, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004, and he and his wife 
have three native-born children, all U.S. citizens. He and his immediate family reside in 
the United States. He had his Russian passport destroyed. Although he personally 
renounced his Russian citizenship emotionally and under U.S. law, he has not formally 
relinquished it under Russian law as it is a long and costly process, requiring that he 
return to Russia, with a valid Russian passport, to do so. However, he is willing to 
commence the process, if necessary. He has no foreign financial interests in Russia. He 
is fully involved in his children’s lives and activities. Applicant and his wife have “such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  I find AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies in this case. 
 
It is true that, since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2004, Applicant took two trips to 
Russia to visit his parents and sister.  At the time of his 2003 trip to Russia, he was still 
a Russian citizen, and that trip should have no current security interest.  
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and his “closest family”—
his wife, and their three children—are all U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. As 
such, they are not vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation, and the realistic 
possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress with regard to them is low. His 
80-year-old father, nearly 70-year-old mother, and his 43-year-old sister reside in 
Russia. While they are more vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation, because of 
their age and low political profile, the realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress with regard to them is also low. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Russia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situations in those countries, as well as the dangers existing there. Russia is 
a diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States in some areas where both 
countries have mutual interests. Russia is a key partner in the search for peace in the 
Middle East and resolution of problems with Iraq and Iran. Russia, then a part of the 
Soviet Union, was an important ally in World War II, and then our greatest antagonist 
during the Cold War.  Russia has a mixed human rights record, and like the United 
States, has been subject to terrorist attacks. Russia is a known collector of U.S. 
economic intelligence and proprietary information, but the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress based upon Applicant’s remaining ties to Russia—his 
parents and sister without any affiliation or relationship to the Government of Russia—
are insufficient to raise a security concern. 
 
As to Applicant’s actions in renewing and using his Russian passport on two 
occasions after he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, they raise several different issues. 
When Applicant renewed his Russian passport, he had no intention of reflecting a 
preference for Russia over the United States. At that time, he was unaware of the 
 
14 
                                      
 
security significance of his actions. When he did learn of the significance, Applicant took 
immediate steps to have his Russian passport destroyed by his FSO, and did so in 
October 2009, when he surrendered it to his employer’s security department and it was 
destroyed.  (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 2(a)(5), 2(a)(7), and 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from the Government’s 
foreign influence concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
