 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-05844
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns that arise from his use of cocaine
and his arrest and conviction for driving while under the influence of alcohol when he
served in the Navy and possessed a security clearance in 2007. Clearance is denied.
On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal
conduct). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on June
17, 2009. He admitted all SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2010. A notice of hearing was issued
on September 13, 2010, scheduling the hearing for September 29, 2010. The hearing was
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant was obviously also placed on probation because a petition seeking to violate his probation was filed2
subsequent to his conviction. However, the record does not establish the length or any other terms of the probation. 
2
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted six documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6, and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified, called one witness to testify on his behalf, and he submitted nine
documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-9, and admitted into
the record without objection. The transcript was received on October 7, 2010.
     
Procedural Issues
The notice of hearing was issued 16 days before the hearing date.  Department
Counsel stated on the record that she had provided the Applicant an e-mail copy of the
notice and spoke with on the phone concerning the hearing date 15 days before the
hearing date. Applicant stated he was prepared to proceed on the hearing date and waived
any further 15-day notice requirement he was entitled to under the terms of the Directive.
(Tr. 14-15)
  
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 28 years old. He has been employed as an aircraft worker by
successive defense contractors since January 2009. He submitted the testimony of his
supervisor and letters of recommendation from co-workers that establish they consider him
to be trustworthy, reliable, possessed of sound judgment and good character, and an
excellent employee.
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2001. He entered on active duty with
the Navy in September 2001, and he served continuously on active duty until August 2007.
The highest rank Applicant achieved was petty officer second class. He was discharged
as a petty officer third class with an Other Than Honorable Discharge due to a pattern of
misconduct.
Applicant was married in October 2003. That marriage ended in divorce in
December 2007. No children were born of the marriage. Applicant has a six-month-old
child with his current girlfriend.  
Applicant was arrested and charged with drunk driving in September 2006. His
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was 0.11 when he was arrested. Applicant was
convicted of drunk driving (over .08) in February 2007, and he was sentenced to perform
four days community service, attend an alcohol awareness class, and ordered to pay fines
and court costs totaling approximately $1,700.  2
3
Applicant’s driving privileges were suspended for 30 days following his arrest for
drunk driving. On the 31  day after his arrest he was charged with driving on a suspendedst
license as he attempted to drive onto a military base. The suspended license charge was
apparently consolidated with the drunk driving charge and dismissed when he was
convicted in February 2007.
Applicant failed to pay the fines and court costs that were assessed in the drunk
driving case in a timely fashion, and a violation of probation (VOP) petition was filed, and
a bench warrant was issued. Applicant paid the outstanding balance on the fine and court
costs and the VOP was set aside and the warrant was recalled in December 2009.   
Following the July 4, 2007 holiday, Applicant was administered a urinalysis by the
Navy which tested positive for the presence of cocaine. He was found to have violated
Article 112a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), wrongful use of a controlled
substance (cocaine), at a Captain’s Mast and he was awarded reduction in rank to petty
officer third class, forfeiture of seven days pay, 14 days restriction, 14 days extra duty, and
removal of his Enlisted Aviation Warfare Designation. Appellant was thereafter
administratively separated from the Navy on August 31, 2007, and awarded an Other Than
Honorable Discharge due to a pattern of misconduct. 
Applicant denied at the Captain’s Mast, during a June 2009 interview conducted in
connection with his current application for a security clearance, and at the personal
appearance that he knowingly ingested cocaine. Instead, he has repeatedly claimed that
he was at a bar with friends and someone must have placed cocaine in his beer without
his knowledge. He bases this on his assertion that after drinking a couple of beers at the
bar he began to black out and had to be taken home by one of his companions. He does
not know who placed the cocaine in his beer and he cannot provide an explanation for why
someone would have placed cocaine in his beer. Although he claims he was feeling funny
and weird and that he blacked out after only consuming a couple of beers, he did not seek
medical attention but instead just had someone drive him home. 
Applicant was employed as a fabricator from March 2008 to April 2008. He was fired
from that job after he was involved in a verbal argument with the owner of the company.
He was employed by a temporary agency from August to September 2008. He was fired
from that job for attendance issues. He testified his termination from this job was unjustified
and that he was awarded unemployment benefits because the state unemployment
department agreed with his claim.
Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in January 2003. His security
clearance investigation and adjudication history (AE 3) indicates that an incident report was
filed at some time, apparently as a result of the Captain’s Mast for the wrongful use of a
controlled substance. However, that same document indicates that his security clearance
eligibility was terminated on February 7, 2008, based on a loss of jurisdiction.  
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id. at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
4
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guidelines H
(drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with their disqualifying and mitigating
conditions are most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
5
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 24)
Applicant tested positive for cocaine following a urinalysis administered by the Navy
in July 2007. He possessed a secret security clearance when he tested positive for
cocaine. Applicant was found to have committed the offense of wrongful use of a controlled
substance (cocaine) based on the positive urinalysis at a Captain’s Mast that same month
and he was awarded various punishments including a reduction in rank. He was
administratively discharged from the Navy on August 31, 2007, and he was awarded an
Other Than Honorable Discharge due to a pattern of misconduct. Disqualifying Conditions
(DC) 25(a): any drug abuse: DC 25(b): testing positive for illegal drug use; and DC 25(g):
any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance all apply.
It has been over three years since Applicant was found to have abused a controlled
substance, and there is no evidence he abused a controlled substance on any other
occasion.  However, Applicant was charged with drunk driving just ten months before he
was found to have used cocaine. He was convicted of the drunk driving and sentenced for
that offense just five months before he used cocaine. A VOP petition was filed and a bench
warrant issued when he failed to pay the fines that were ordered for the drunk driving
conviction. The bench warrant was not recalled until December 2009, when Applicant
finally paid the fines. Accordingly, it is clear that Applicant was on probation for the drunk
driving conviction when he used cocaine. 
Applicant’s explanation for how cocaine came to be in his system was not believed
by the officer who presided over the Captain’s Mast. I also find his explanation to not be
credible. It strains credibility to believe that for no apparent reason someone unknown to
Applicant would dump cocaine into his beer and that he would have a reaction of blacking
out from what is known to be a stimulating drug. Equally unbelievable is that he would not
have sought medical attention if he truly experienced the effects that he claims. 
I have considered Mitigating Condition (MC) 26(a): the behavior happened so long
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment and conclude it does not apply. Applicant’s abuse of a controlled substance while
in possession of a security clearance and his repeated denial of that abuse at the Captain’s
Mast, during an interview in connection with his security clearance application, and at the
hearing, combine to severely cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of this
case.     
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or willingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure
to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG 15)
Applicant abused cocaine, was found to have abused cocaine at a Captain’s Mast,
and received an Other Than Honorable Discharge from the Navy, in part, based on the
cocaine abuse, all in 2007. He was charged with drunk driving in September 2006, and he
was convicted of drunk driving (over .08) in February 2007. He drove on a suspended
license in October 2006, following his arrest for drunk driving. He was fired from one job
in March 2008, because he got into a verbal argument with the owner of the company that
employed him, and from a second job in September 2008, due to attendance issues.
Although not alleged in the SOR, it is noteworthy that a bench warrant was issued for his
arrest that was not recalled until December 2009, when he finally paid the fines that were
assessed again him in February 2007.
 
DC 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when
combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to
consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations applies. 
Accepting as true Applicant’s claim that his job termination in September 2008 was
unjustified, he still has displayed a pattern of violating laws and court orders that began in
September 2006 and continued until December 2009. Accordingly, I have considered MC
17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and
I conclude it does not apply. 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, the
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and the strong letters of support that
Applicant submitted from his current supervisors and co-workers, I find Applicant failed to
mitigate the drug involvement, and personal conduct security concerns. He has not
overcome the case against him nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Guidelines H and E are decided against Applicant. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

