 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05485 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 30, 2009. On April 
12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 21, 2010; answered it on June 14, 2010; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
June 21, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 31, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to an administrative judge on August 6, 2010. It was reassigned to 
me on August 19, 2010, to consolidate the docket. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 6, 2010, scheduling it for August 31, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 12 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel also submitted a demonstrative exhibit summarizing the 
Government evidence, which was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through M, which were admitted without 
objection. I kept the record open until September 17, 2010, to enable Applicant to 
submit additional documentary evidence. At Applicant’s request, I extended the 
deadline to October 1, 2010. (HX II.) He timely submitted AX N through Q. Department 
Counsel’s comments regarding AX N through Q are attached to the record as HX III. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 8, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, 
except SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.s. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He was an administrator at a private school from July 
1984 until December 2001, when the school closed. He was unemployed until he began 
working for a federal agency in September 2002. He was terminated for absenteeism 
due to medical problems in June 2006. He admitted at the hearing and in his security 
clearance application that he should have informed his supervisor of his medical 
problem. (GX 1 at 23.) He held a security clearance during his federal employment. He 
was unemployed until April 2007, when he found employment in the private sector. He 
was unemployed from July 2008 until January 2009, when he began his current job as a 
weapons handler for a defense contractor.  
 
Applicant’s current supervisor, a retired U.S. Army sergeant major, submitted a 
letter recommending that Applicant be granted a clearance. He described Applicant as a 
dedicated and trustworthy leader and employee whose performance has been 
frequently recognized as outstanding. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant married in July 1975 and divorced in August 1978. He remarried in 
June 1980. He and his wife separated in November 2003. (GX 2 at 7.) Neither has filed 
for divorce. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began with his unemployment in December 2001. 
They were exacerbated by his wife’s unsuccessful attempt at operating a childcare 
center that began failing in 2000. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions in September 2001, June 2002, 
July 2003, and January 2004. (GX 8-11.) The June 2002 petition was filed solely by 
Applicant; the other three were jointly filed by Applicant and his wife. All four were 
 
3 
 
 
dismissed for failure to make the required payments. (GX 4 at 4.) The four bankruptcies 
are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. 
 
 Since 2006, Applicant has lived with another woman and her son. She owns the 
home, but they share the living expenses. All the utilities and other credit accounts are 
in her name. (Tr. 47.) Applicant’s take-home pay is between $442 and $449 per week, 
and he gives his companion about $300 per week to pay their living expenses. (Tr. 46.) 
His companion lost her job about two months before the hearing, and her application for 
unemployment benefits was denied on the ground that she was terminated for willful 
misconduct. (Tr. 49-50; AX H.) As of the date of the hearing, her electric bill, telephone 
bill, and homeowner’s insurance bill were past due. (AX F, J, L, and M.) 
 
 In addition to the four bankruptcies, the SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling 
about $31,000. Applicant testified that he has been unable to make payments on any of 
his debts since 2000. (Tr. 54.) He admitted all the debts except for those alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.g, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.s, and his admissions are corroborated by his credit bureau 
reports. (GX 5, 6, 7, and 12.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a federal tax lien. Applicant testified that his tax 
refunds were seized to pay the debt. He received a refund for tax year 2010, indicating 
that the lien was satisfied. (Tr. 57; AX P.)  
 
Applicant testified he paid the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k, but he 
presented no documentation of payment. (Tr. 59.) He testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.o was for overpayment of wages by a previous employer and that it was satisfied by 
withholding part of his final pay, but he presented no documentation. (Tr. 63.) He denied 
the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.p and the insurance bill in SOR ¶ 1.s, but he presented no 
evidence that the debts were resolved or that he had filed a dispute with the credit 
bureau. He presented evidence that the deficiency from a car repossession alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.r was being collected by garnishment of his pay. (Tr. 63; AX B; AX Q.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
ongoing, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
The failure of the childcare business operated by Applicant’s wife was a 
circumstance beyond their control. Applicant’s unemployment after his school closed in 
December 2001, and his unemployment from July 2008 to January 2009 were 
circumstances beyond his control. However, Applicant has not acted responsibly. He 
lost his job in June 2006 through his own fault. As of the date of the hearing, he had 
been employed for 20 months but had taken no action to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
sought or received counseling, and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant testified that the delinquent debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.k, and 1.o were resolved, but he submitted no documentary 
evidence to support his testimony. He denied the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.p and the 
insurance bill in SOR ¶ 1.s, but presented no evidence to show that he had resolved the 
debts or disputed them. The federal tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.g was satisfied by seizure of tax 
 
6 
 
 
refunds, and the car repossession deficiency in SOR ¶ 1.r is being resolved by 
garnishment of his pay, but those involuntary collections do not show good faith. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.s. 
He provided evidence that the federal tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.g was recently satisfied, but 
he presented no documentary proof of a basis for disputing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 
1.p, and 1.s. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g, but it is not 
established for the remaining debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has established a good reputation with his 
current employer. He was candid and sincere at the hearing. He has reacted passively 
to his financial situation, allowing his income tax refunds to be seized and his pay to be 
garnished, but he has taken no affirmative action to resolve his debts. Although 
Applicant denied the federal tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g and provided evidence that it 
had been satisfied, the involuntary collection of this debt by seizure of his tax refunds is 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by it.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
 
7 
 
 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
