                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 09-07107 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 18, 2009 to request a security clearance required as part of 
his employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.1  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 See Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
On May 19, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 
1) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on May 25, 2010. He forwarded an Answer to the 
SOR, dated June 1, 2010, which was received by DOHA on June 14, 2010. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three SOR allegations. He also requested a 
decision based on the written record. DOHA Department Counsel issued a file of 
relevant materials (FORM),2 dated August 11, 2010, in support of the Government’s 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request for a security clearance. The FORM 
was forwarded to Applicant on August 12, 2010, and he received it on August 23, 2010. 
He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to respond, but did not 
submit a response. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2010, for an 
administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He married for the first time in 1992, and divorced in 
1995. He has been married to his second wife since 1996. He has three children who 
range from nine to thirteen years of age. He has worked for the same defense 
contractor since 2002, other than a brief period when he was laid off from January to 
March 2009. He is a material detail inspector. (Item 5) 
 
In his security interview of July 2009, Applicant explained that his financial 
problems began because he had been receiving overtime income and was spending 
based on that extra income. When the overtime was no longer available, he was unable 
to make his car loan payments. He stated he mismanaged his money and lived beyond 
what he could afford on his base salary. Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling. (Items 6, 7) 
 
Applicant stated in his interrogatory response of January 2010 that he has 
sufficient income now to meet his current expenses and debts. The personal financial 
statement he completed shows a net monthly income of $2,505 and monthly expenses 
of $1,639, leaving $866. From that amount, he makes four debt payments per month 
that total $875. His monthly net remainder is negative $9.00. (Item 7) 
 
 The three SOR debts, which appear in Applicant's credit reports of June 2009 
and February 2010, total $24,471. They represent the remaining balances after three 
cars were repossessed. (Items 6, 8, 9) 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 
 The status of Applicant's SOR debts follows. 
 
Car loan #1, $4,442 (allegation 1.a.) – UNPAID. Applicant and his wife 
purchased a car for $18,000 in 1998. He paid the loan until about 2006, when he 
missed two payments. He was unable to make further payments, and asked the 
creditor to take the car. He believes the $4,442 debt is the balance after the car 
was sold. At his security interview in July 2009, he stated he intended to contact 
the company to arrange to pay the balance. (Items 6, 8, 9) 
 
Car loan #2, $6,647 (allegation 1.b.) – UNPAID. Applicant and his wife 
purchased a car in about 2002 or 2003 for $23,000. In 2006, he fell behind in his 
payments and asked the creditor to retrieve the car. He believes it was sold, and 
the debt is for the remaining balance after the sale. He has not been contacted 
by the creditor. He informed the agent at his security interview in July 2009 that 
he intended to contact the company and arrange to pay the debt. (Items 6, 8, 9) 
 
Car loan #3, $13,382 (allegation 1.c.) – UNPAID. In about 1998, Applicant and 
his wife purchased a car. He made the car payments on time. In about 2003, he 
realized he no longer needed the car. After receiving “bad advice” from his car 
dealer, he called the creditor and asked the company to take the car. He was not 
behind in his payments when the car was repossessed. He did not realize that 
the remaining balance would be a derogatory entry on his credit report. He 
believes the $13,382 is the amount he owed at the time of the repossession. He 
stated in his security interview of July 2009 that he would contact the creditor 
about payment arrangements. (Items 6, 9) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant’s delinquencies 
started in 2003. He stated in his interrogatory response that he is able to meet his 
current debts, but the information he provided in his personal financial statement does 
not support his claim, as it shows a negative monthly remainder. His seven-year history 
of failing to meet his financial obligations supports application of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). 
 
 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay his debts did not occur in the distant past, because the 
debts are still delinquent. He has not shown that delinquencies are unlikely to recur. His 
unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be 
applied. 
 
 Nothing in the file indicates that Applicant’s financial situation resulted from 
circumstances beyond his control. He admits that he made poor financial decisions and 
lived beyond his means. He did not act responsibly by seeking financial counseling to 
help resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. In January 2010, Applicant told 
the security investigator that he that he would contact the creditors to make payment 
arrangements. Despite this statement, the record contains no evidence to show he paid 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR or made any effort to contact the creditors or 
establish payment plans to resolve his debts. Mitigation is unavailable under AG 20(c) 
and AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He 
accrued more than $24,000 in debt since 2003. In response to the Government’s 
concerns, he offered no evidence to show he has paid any of the SOR debts or initiated 
a plan to do so. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information 
bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not 
demonstrated the good judgment and trustworthiness required in those who protect the 
Government’s interests. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in 
these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government.7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
