 
1 
 
 
                                           
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )   ISCR Case No. 09-00631 
                                              )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on 
March 17, 2005.1 On July 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
1 The SF 86 in the FORM is dated August 12, 2009. Included with the SF 86 is a paper, purportedly 
signed by Applicant and dated March 17, 2005. The record also includes Applicant’s personal subject 
interview, which occurred on May 3, 2006. In responses to DOHA interrogatories, dated June 18, 2009, 
and May 6, 2010, Applicant provided additional information.     
 
2 
 
 
                                           
  
 On August 10, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 15, 2010. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. In addition, the Government compiled facts 
about Taiwan from 15 official U.S. government publications and requested that I take 
administrative notice of those facts. By letter dated September 16, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM, the factual summary containing information about 
Taiwan, and the source documents from which those facts were derived to Applicant, 
with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt.  Applicant received the file on September 19, 2010. His response was due on 
October 29, 2010. He did not submit any information or raise any objections within the 
required time period. On November 8, 2010, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted three Guideline B allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.) He denied the 
allegation at SOR ¶ 1.d.  Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 30 years old, never married, and employed by a government 
contractor as an embedded software developer. In 2002, Applicant earned a Bachelor 
of Science degree, and in 2004, he earned a Master of Science degree. Both degrees 
were conferred by a U.S. university. Applicant seeks a security clearance for the first 
time. (Item 5.) 
 
 In May 2006, Applicant was interviewed about his citizenship status by an 
authorized investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).2 Applicant 
told the investigator that he was born in the United States while his parents, citizens of 
the Republic of China (Taiwan), were in the United States pursuing higher education. 
Shortly after Applicant’s birth, his family returned to Taiwan. When Applicant was about 
four years old, his family moved back to the United States, where, for about ten years, 
Applicant’s father was employed by the government of Taiwan. In 1994 Applicant’s 
family returned to Taiwan, where he attended high school. After graduating from high 
school in 1998, Applicant returned to the United States to attend college. Applicant’s 
parents remained in Taiwan, where his father took a position as president of a private 
company. Applicant’s mother is a homemaker in Taiwan. Applicant has in-person 
contact with his parents approximately twice a year, when they come to the United 
States to visit him. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 
2 Applicant reviewed the investigator’s summary of the interview, and, on June 18, 2009, he provided 
additional clarifying information. He did not dispute the accuracy of the information recited herein. (Item 
6.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, held dual citizenship with Taiwan. During 
his college years, he used his Taiwanese passport to travel from the United States to 
Taiwan to visit his parents during summer vacations. He used his Taiwan passport for 
travel to Taiwan because it was more convenient than obtaining a visa and using his 
U.S. passport to enter Taiwan. After 2000, Applicant did not renew his Taiwanese 
passport. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he reported that he no longer 
possesses a Taiwanese passport.  (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 While he was living in Taiwan, Applicant participated in Taiwan’s universal health 
insurance, a benefit provided to those holding Taiwanese citizenship. He does not 
exercise this benefit while living in the United States. Applicant stated that he was 
willing to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship if required to do so to hold a U.S. security 
clearance. (Item 6.)     
 
 Applicant has a brother who is a naturalized U.S. citizen and resides in the 
United States. Applicant’s maternal grandparents are citizens of Taiwan and reside in   
Canada. Applicant’s maternal grandfather is a retired physician. His maternal 
grandmother is a homemaker. Applicant has telephone contact with his grandparents 
once a month. (Item 6.) 
 
 In his 2006 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant stated that a family 
friend, a U.S. citizen, worked for the government of Taiwan in the United States. 
Applicant identified this person because he considered her to be his closest contact with 
a foreign government. The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.d. that the family friend was a current 
employee of the Taiwanese government. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
allegation 1.d. and stated that the person had retired from her position with the 
government of Taiwan. (Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant also reported in his 2006 interview with the OPM investigator that two 
of his uncles on his father’s side served in the Taiwanese military. One of the uncles 
was on active duty in 2006; the other was retired. In response to DOHA interrogatories 
in May 2010, Applicant reported that “all relatives in military have retired.” (Item 7 at 3.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reported at least five trips to 
Canada between 2004 and 2009. His most recent trip to Taiwan occurred in December 
2007. (Item 7.) 
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Taiwan, as contained in 
official U.S. government documents provided by Department Counsel to Applicant in the 
FORM: 
 
In 1949, following a civil war between the Nationalist Chinese and the 
Chinese Communist Party, two million refugees, predominately Nationalist 
members and supporters, fled from mainland China to Taiwan. That same 
year, Communists in mainland China established the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC or China), and Chiang Kai-shek established a separate, 
 
4 
 
 
provisional capital for his government in Taipei, Taiwan. The PRC does 
not recognize Taiwan’s independence and insists that there is only “one 
China.” After long recognizing Taiwan, on January 1, 1979, the U.S. 
formally recognized the government of the PRC as the sole legal 
government of China. The U.S. does not support independence for 
Taiwan and is committed to a “one-China policy,” under the Taiwan 
Relations Act, signed into law on April 10, 1979. 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy that has significant economic contacts 
with China, and it has developed a strong economy since its separation 
from the PRC in 1949. Despite substantial economic ties, the People’s 
Republic of China did not hold any official talks with Taiwan from October 
1998 until June 2008. Moreover, the governments of Taiwan and the 
People’s Republic of China still do not negotiate directly. “The military’s 
primary mission is the defense of Taiwan against the P.R.C., which is 
seen as the predominant threat and which has not renounced the use of 
force against Taiwan.” The PRC’s Ministry of State Security is the 
“preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and maintains 
intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwan connections. 
 
Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, 
and the National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Annual Report to 
Congress of Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists 
Taiwan as being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and 
proprietary information. The 2000 Report highlights specific incidents 
wherein Taiwan engaged in attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
 
There have been various cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Taiwan, including: 
(1) laser gun aimer/ sights; (2) measuring probes controlled for nuclear 
nonproliferation and national security reasons; (3) centrifugal pumps that 
are controlled for chemical and biological weapons and anti-terrorism 
reasons; (3) Metal Organic Vapor Disposition tools controlled for national 
security and anti-terrorism reasons; (5) fluid control valves that are 
controlled for national security, foreign policy, nonproliferation or anti-
terrorism reasons; radio communication encryption modules; and (7) 
controlled nickel powder. 
 
(FORM  at 5-7; footnotes and citations omitted.) 
 
 Additionally, in December 2005, a high U.S. official pled guilty to removing 
classified materials and to providing false statements to the U.S. Government. The 
official was engaged in a relationship with an intelligence officer employed by the 
foreign intelligence agency of the government of Taiwan. (FORM at 8.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
6 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. Applicant’s close contacts and relationships with family members who are 
citizens of Taiwan raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” 
 
 Applicant provided some credible information to establish that his family friend 
was retired and no longer employed by the Taiwanese government. Accordingly, the 
SOR allegation at ¶ 1.d. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
While the United States and Taiwan share common democratic values, Taiwan is 
strongly focused on protecting itself from possible military action from the PRC. Toward 
that end, Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information that could assist in strengthening its defensive position, and it has targeted 
 
7 
 
 
U.S. government organizations in order to acquire U.S. technology. American citizens 
with immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Taiwan could be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, inducements, or pressure by those seeking to 
acquire proprietary or otherwise restricted U.S. technology for the benefit of Taiwan.  
 
 Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant’s 
father was employed by the Taiwanese government in the United States for ten years 
during Applicant’s childhood. He now is employed as the president of a private company 
in Taiwan. Additionally, Applicant’s maternal grandparents are citizens of Taiwan who 
reside in Canada. Applicant sees his parents about twice a year when they travel to the 
United States to visit him. He has monthly telephone contact with his grandparents in 
Canada.   
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with his parents and grandparents are neither casual 
nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of affection and obligation. 
Applicant is in close familial contact with his parents and grandparents, all of whom are 
citizens of Taiwan. His parents travel to the United States to visit him.  
 
Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. proprietary information. Both of Applicant’s 
parents have been educated in the United States, and they are familiar with the 
workings of the U.S. federal government. For approximately ten years, Applicant’s 
father was employed by the Taiwanese government in the United States. Several of his 
relatives, now retired, served in the Taiwanese military. Nothing in the record suggests 
that Applicant’s parents, grandparents, and extended family in Taiwan know of the 
nature of his work as a federal contractor, but if they did, this could raise additional 
conflict of interest concerns that might also threaten U.S. security interests. Applicant 
failed to meet his burden of providing information to rebut or mitigate the security 
concerns raised by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). I therefore conclude that the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
 
8 
 
 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and well-
educated professional with a specialty in software development. He has close familial 
ties with his parents and grandparents, all of whom are citizens of Taiwan. He is in 
frequent contact with his family members. Applicant’s father was employed by the 
government of Taiwan and worked in the United States for ten years. Taiwan actively 
seeks to collect proprietary information from U.S. businesses and government 
contractors. Because of his close relationships with Taiwanese citizens, Applicant could 
be vulnerable to foreign exploitation, inducement, pressure, or coercion.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the   
foreign influence adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:                       For Applicant 
  
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
