 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02731 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On unspecified dates, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him three sets of interrogatories. He responded to the 
first set of interrogatories on June 15, 2009;2 the second set of interrogatories on June 
15, 2009;3 and the third set of interrogatories on August 13, 2009.4 On November 24, 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated December 2, 2008.  
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 15, 2009). 
 
3 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 15, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
2009, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 21, 2010. In a sworn, 
written statement, notarized on January 26, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on May 22, 2010, and the 
case was assigned me on June 7, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on July 1, 
2010, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on July 15, 2010.5 
 
 During the hearing, six Government exhibits were admitted into evidence, without 
objection. Applicant testified. The record remained open to afford Applicant the 
opportunity to supplement it, and at sometime before August 4, 2010, he submitted two 
documents that were admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibits A and B, 
respectively, without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 23, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
(¶¶ 1.a. through 1.w., 1.aa. through 1.ee., 1.gg. through 1.jj., 1.mm., and 1.pp.) of the 
SOR. He denied the remaining factual allegations (¶¶ 1.x. through 1.z., 1.ff., 1.kk., 1.ll., 
1.nn., and 1.oo.). 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a senior instructor specialist,6 and he is seeking to obtain a security clearance. A May 
1992 high school graduate,7 he served on active duty with the U.S. Air Force from 
December 1992 until April 1994,8 including service in Iraq.9 Because of misconduct, he 
 
 
4 Government Exhibit 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 13, 2009). 
 
5 On July 15, 2010, Applicant executed a waiver of the 15-day notice requirement set forth in the Directive, 
Additional Procedural Guidance Sec. E3.1.8. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
7 Id. at 11. 
 
8 Id. at 23. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
received a General Discharge (Under Honorable Conditions).10 Since leaving active 
duty, he has worked in a variety of positions in a variety of locations. He was a driver; a 
mechanic; a crew chief; a maintenance foreman in Iraq; a quality controller in Iraq; and 
an instructor, before being hired by his current employer.11 He has been with his current 
employer since December 2008.12 
 
Applicant has been married since January 1999,13 and he and his wife have four 
children, aged 11, 9, 7, and 5, respectively.14 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until he was discharged 
from the military in 1994, at which time his employment became “sporadic”15 with 
minimum wage jobs.16 Commencing in 2000, the family was living “beyond our 
means,”17 because his income was not always sufficient to cover all of his family’s living 
expenses, so he delayed making payments on some debts, resulting in getting behind 
on some accounts.18 In addition, he did not have medical insurance, so he would 
routinely take his children to the emergency room rather than to try to come up with 
money to pay for a doctor.19 On two occasions, once in 2003 when he had his appendix 
removed, and once in 2005 for a heart condition, Applicant had to be hospitalized 
between five and seven days.20 Throughout this entire period, Applicant’s wife did not 
work.21 During an unspecified period when his wife was pregnant, Applicant and his 
family received food stamps.22 They also received Medicaid coverage until October 
2005.23 
 
9 Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated April 21, 1994, attached to 
Government Exhibit 4, supra note 4. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 13-18. 
 
12 Id. at 12. 
 
13 Id. at 20. 
 
14 Tr. at 22. 
 
15 Personal Subject Interview, dated January 21, 2009, at 1, attached to Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2. 
 
16 Tr. at 25. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Id. 
 
20 Id. at 25-26. 
 
21 Id. at 28-33. 
 
22 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 26, 2010. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
In December 2008, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he stated that in the 
last seven years, he had not been over 180 days delinquent on any debts, and that he 
was not currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts.24 Both of those statements 
were false.25 
 
In January 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and they discussed his entire financial 
situation.26 Applicant stated that he would “determine the validity of the debts” 
discussed, and he would satisfy all the valid debts “over the next 60 months.”27 At that 
time, he had not received any financial counseling or debt consolidation guidance.28 
 
In June, 2009, Applicant submitted a partial personal financial statement.29 That 
document reflected only monthly expenses of $2,884, with no information pertaining to 
net monthly income, scheduled monthly debt payments, or net monthly remainder, if 
any, available for discretionary spending.30 During the hearing, he indicated his current 
annual salary is $86,000.31 He also acknowledged that his budget was not committed to 
paper.32 
 
About three or four months before the hearing, Applicant met with a financial 
counselor, but it was purportedly determined that Applicant’s debt was not of the type to 
be consolidated because it was medical debt and not credit card debt.33 He has offered 
 
23 Tr. at 76-77. 
 
24 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 29. 
 
25 The SOR did not allege that Applicant had falsified his responses to the financial questions in the SF 86. 
In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3. 
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 
2003)). I have considered the non-SOR derogatory information in this decision solely to assess Applicant’s credibility 
regarding his purported efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
26 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 15. 
 
27 Id. at 2. 
 
28 Id. 
 
29 Personal Financial Statement, undated, attached to Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3. 
 
30 Id. 
 
31 Tr. at 33. 
 
32 Id. at 81. 
 
33 Id. at 79-80. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
no documentation to support that determination. On July 19, 2010, four days after the 
hearing, Applicant met with a financial counselor, and purportedly engaged their debt 
management counseling services in negotiating a repayment plan with his creditors.34 A 
debt management program was prepared, covering 16 creditors with an outstanding 
balance of $8,738.35 Under the program, Applicant was to deposit with the financial 
counselor $400.60 on July 19, 2010; and $336.60 every month thereafter, from which 
$296 was to be paid to those particular creditors, commencing in November 2010, with 
an estimated payoff date for the final payment in October 2012.36  
 
During the hearing, Applicant indicated that, for the vast majority of the 
delinquent accounts, he had made no efforts to contact the creditors or attempt to set 
up repayment plans. Those few creditors with whom he made such attempts were 
unresponsive. Some of the creditors were not known to him. He claimed he sought 
validation from some creditors, and disputed other accounts,37 but offered no 
documentation to support his claims. His position regarding his debts differs slightly 
from the major position he stated in his responses to the interrogatories in June 2009, 
wherein he generally stated: “Seeking credit counseling to pay off debts.”38 With the 
exception of his SOR-related delinquent accounts, Applicant is current on all other 
financial obligations.39  
 
The SOR identified 42 purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling $20,747, as 
reflected by credit reports from 200840 and 2009.41 Some accounts have been 
transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts 
are referenced repeatedly in the credit reports, in many instances duplicating other 
accounts listed, either under the same creditor or collection agent name, or under a 
different creditor or collection agent name. Some accounts are identified by complete 
account numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in some 
instances eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits.  
 
 
 
34 Applicant Exhibit A (Debt Management Agreement Program, dated July 19, 2010, at 4. It should be noted 
that this is a proposed agreement that is not signed by either party, and it is unclear if the agreement ever actually 
went into effect. 
 
35 Id. at 1. 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Tr. at 35-76. 
 
38 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 2-4, 6-8. 
 
39 Tr. at 82-83. 
 
40 Government Exhibit 6 (Combined Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax Credit Report, dated December 12, 
2008) (2008 Credit Report). 
 
41 Government Exhibit 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 29, 2009) (2009 Credit Report). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
nt accounts. 
                                                          
Two of the accounts listed in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.s.), medical accounts, are 
identical accounts,42 although two different collection agencies and two different 
account numbers appear in the credit reports. The outstanding balance for both is $305, 
and both accounts were opened in November 2005. Other accounts may also be 
duplicates of other accounts, but in the absence of evidence to support such a 
conclusion, they must stand as stated in the SOR. As to the accounts listed in the SOR, 
based on the absence of documentary evidence of payments before me, I conclude that 
no payments have been made to any of the delinque
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”43 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”44   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”45 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
42 Id. at 1; Government Exhibit 6, supra note 39, at 7. 
 
43 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
44 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
45 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.46  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”47 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”48 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
46 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
47 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
48 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Also, under AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” is potentially disqualifying. As 
noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until he was 
discharged from the U.S. Air Force in 1994. Commencing in 2000, the family was living 
beyond their means because his income was not always sufficient to cover all of his 
family’s living expenses, so they delayed making some payments to creditors, resulting 
in getting behind on some accounts. With insufficient funds to pay the monthly 
payments, Applicant’s accounts fell deeper into delinquency. Although he received food 
stamps and Medicaid, accounts remained delinquent and were sent for collection. They 
have remained in a delinquent status ever since. He made limited efforts to contact 
some of his creditors to resolve his accounts until 2010. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) 
apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@49 Also, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  
49 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced sometime between 1994 and 2000, 
and have continued to the present day, although he joined his current employer in 
December 2008, and currently earns an annual salary of $86,000. Although he 
remained gainfully employed throughout the entire period, Applicant has acknowledged 
living beyond his means with little effort to address his delinquent accounts. Ignoring the 
timely handling of his bills, while still spending money, Applicant actually exacerbated 
his financial meltdown. Because he has multiple delinquent debts and his financial 
problems are continuing in nature, he receives minimal application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Likewise, he receives minimal application of AG ¶ 20(b), for while he may have 
worked for awhile in low-paying positions, there is little evidence that Applicant was 
buffeted by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant failed to act responsibly under 
the circumstances. Rather than consolidating and minimizing expenses, he seemingly 
continued to spend unwisely. He continued his expenditures, ignored his debts, and 
failed to reduce his delinquencies.50  
 
AG & 20(c) partially applies because Applicant has received financial counseling 
and debt consolidation guidance from a credit counselor, in preparation of a proposed 
debt management program, in July 2010. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) minimally applies because Applicant made limited efforts to address 
his delinquent accounts until after the hearing. There is no documentary evidence to 
support Applicant’s contentions that he ever contacted any of those creditors to try to 
make repayment arrangements. Instead, he talked about doing so, and promised to do 
so, but there is no documentary evidence that any creditors had agreed with his 
proposed plan or that any payments had, in fact, been made. Over the years, Applicant 
did not act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts. Instead, 
he ignored his debts until his security clearance review commenced.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not provided documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
50 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Following his 
discharge from military service in 1994, Applicant took several low-paying positions. As 
his family grew, his finances spun out of control. After a lengthy period of inaction during 
which he did not address his creditors, according to Applicant, he initiated some efforts 
to address some accounts. After the hearing, he also prepared his repayment proposal. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While less than desired earnings, supplemented by public assistance, were, at times, 
circumstances beyond his control, Applicant continued to obtain services and goods 
from a variety of creditors, but either had no ability or intention to pay for them. As a 
result, he continued to accumulate delinquent debt and did not pay his older debts. 
Even as his income improved, he did not make significant efforts to pay any of 
delinquent debts. Instead, he generally ignored his creditors until the hearing. After the 
hearing, he prepared a proposed repayment plan, without documented concurrence 
from his creditors, and made a number of promises to follow his repayment plan. Yet, 
despite the passage of time, there is little documentation to support his contentions that 
he had contacted his creditors, signed the debt management program, or actually 
commenced his promised payments in compliance with his repayment plan. His long-
standing failure to repay creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange 
payment plans, while creating new debts, reflects traits which raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance.  
 
I am mindful that while any one factor, considered in isolation, might put 
Applicant’s credit history in a sympathetic light, I have evaluated the various aspects of 
this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a 
piecemeal analysis.51 His insufficient good-faith efforts or documentary evidence to 
reflect actual payments to his SOR creditors are sufficient to raise continuing security 
concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
51 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:52 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Although there are some positive signs, such as Applicant’s descriptions of 
efforts to take corrective actions, and maintenance of accounts on his current daily living 
expenses, these steps are simply insufficient to show he can “live within [his] means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations.” See AG ¶ 18. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
52 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
12 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.w:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.x:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.y:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.z:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.aa:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.bb:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.cc:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.dd:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.ee:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ff:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.gg:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.hh:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ii:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.jj:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.kk:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ll:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.mm:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.nn:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.oo:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.pp:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
