 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04646 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance or access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On January 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories pertaining to his financial 
situation. He responded to the interrogatories on February 26, 2010, and March 18, 
2010.2 On May 6, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
1 Item 4 (SF 86), dated March 26, 2009. 
 
2 Item 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 26, 2010, and March 18, 2010).  
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) for all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 19, 2010. In a sworn, written 
statement, dated May 20, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on July 1, 2010,4 
and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on July 13, 2010, and submitted a letter with attachments 
to Department Counsel on an unspecified date before August 16, 2010.5 The case was 
assigned to me on September 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.d. and 1.e. of the SOR. He denied the remaining factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.c. Applicant's admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a radio communications instructor,6 and he is seeking to retain a SECRET security 
clearance. A May 1965 high school graduate,7 he served on active duty with the U.S. 
Army from November 1966 until June 1987.8 He was granted a TOP SECRET security 
clearance in 1983.9 He has worked in a variety of positions in a variety of locations in 
several different states. He was an action officer, a new equipment training manager, a 
configuration manager, a farmer, and a jailer, before being hired by his current 
3 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 20, 2010). 
 
4 While the FORM is dated June 30, 2010, the Memorandum of Assignment from the Director, DOHA, to me 
indicated the Applicant was provided the FORM on July 1, 2010. 
 
5 Applicant’s Response to the FORM was forwarded to Department Counsel by a Legal Assistant to the 
Department Counsel on August 16, 2010. 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Id. at 6. 
 
9 Id. at 11. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
employer.10 He also went through a period of unemployment from January 2003 until 
September 2005.11 He assumed his position with his current employer in March 2009.12 
 
Applicant was married in 1978 and divorced in 1987.13 He has one son (born in 
1977) and two daughters (born in 1968 and 1989, respectively).14 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2004, after he 
became unemployed. He had previously been able to remain current with all of his 
financial obligations, but conceded that he had stretched his income and was living 
beyond his means by purchasing a house and investing in rental property, while paying 
child support.15 At some unspecified point, Applicant failed to keep up with his monthly 
payments, and accounts started to become delinquent. Some of the accounts were 
placed for collection with a variety of collection agents, and some of the accounts were 
charged off.16  
 
Applicant had a number of non-SOR delinquent accounts which were apparently 
resolved, either by being paid off or successfully disputed, and they are of no further 
security significance. The SOR identified 5 purportedly continuing delinquencies as 
reflected by credit reports from 200917 and 2010,18 totaling approximately $10,658. 
Some accounts reflected in the credit reports have been transferred, reassigned, or sold 
to other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in 
these as well as other different credit reports, in many instances duplicating other 
accounts listed, either under the same creditor name or under a different creditor name. 
Some accounts are identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified 
by partial account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits and in 
others eliminating other digits. Some accounts reflect no account number. 
 
 
10 Id. at 3-6. 
 
11 Personal Subject Interview, dated April 16, 2009, at 1, attached to Item 5, supra note 2; Id. at 5. 
 
12 Id. Item 4, at 3. Applicant was deployed to Iraq for an unspecified period when the preliminary DOHA 
discovery was conducted, and it was difficult for him to gather the documents necessary for him to present to DOHA. 
See Item 5, supra note 2, at 20. 
 
13 Id. Item 4, at 7. 
 
14 Id. at 8. 
 
15 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 11, at 1. 
 
16 Item 8 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 1, 2009). 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Item 9 (Equifax Credit Report, dated January 2, 2010); Item 10 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 10, 
2010). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant contends that three of the accounts listed in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.c.), are not his, but rather the result of identity theft.19 Upon learning of the accounts, 
he reported his concerns to the police and was issued a case number covering the 
three accounts.20 He also reported the identity theft “fraud alert” to the credit reporting 
agencies and noted that his name differed from the ones listed in the credit report 
entries, and that he had never resided at one of the addresses listed in the credit 
reports.21 Applicant reported his concerns to the relevant creditors or their respective 
collection agencies, and upon further investigation and review, at least one of the 
accounts (SOR ¶ 1.c.) was deemed closed and removed from his credit reports.22 It is 
unclear how the other two creditors or their respective collection agencies reacted, but 
neither of those accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) is listed on his most recent credit 
report.23  
 
One of the accounts listed in the SOR (¶ 1.d.), for a bank credit card in the 
amount of $9,618, was charged off and subsequently sold to a delinquent debt buyer.24 
Applicant contacted the original creditor but they referred him to the debt purchaser, and 
he made several attempts to locate the debt purchaser, but was unsuccessful in doing 
so because they are no longer in business.25  
 
 The one remaining account listed in the SOR (¶ 1.e.), for telephone service in the 
amount of $191, was charged off in October 2008.26 Applicant contends, and the 
evidence supports his contention, that the credit reports reflect two telephone accounts 
with the identical account number (one is a nine digit number with a $191 balance, and 
the other is three digits of the same number, with a $130 balance).27 The SOR alleges 
that the account identified with the three digits was acquired by a particular collection 
agency, but aside from an identical balance ($191) there is no evidence tying the 
collection agency to that particular account.28 In his response to the interrogatories, 
Applicant claimed he had paid the account in June or July 2009, but he was unable to 
19 Item 3, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
20 Id.; County Sheriff’s Incident Report, dated May 20, 2010, attached to Item 3. 
 
21 Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 1, 2010, at 1, attached to Item 3; 
Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 31, 2010, at 1, attached to Applicant’s 
Response to the FORM, undated, at 1; Item 6 (Applicant’s credit report comments, dated March 5, 2010). 
 
22 Letter from collection agency, dated May 27, 2010, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM, Id. 
 
23 Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 31, 2010, supra note 21, 
 
24 Item 8, supra note 16, at 6. 
 
25 Item 5, supra note 2, at 16; Item 3, supra note 3, at 3; Express Mail Mailing Label, dated June 1, 2010, 
attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM (reflecting mail was “unclaimed”); U.S. Postal Service Receipt, 
Express Mail Mailing Label, and U.S. Postal Service Track & Confirm, various dates, also attached to Item 3, at 16-17 
(reflecting mail as “undeliverable”). 
 
26 Item 8, supra note 16, at 9. 
 
27 Id. at 9; Item 9, supra note 18, at 2; Item 10, supra note 18, at 2. 
 
28 Id. Item 10. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
furnish documentary proof because he was, at that time, deployed to Iraq.29 
Subsequently, in his Answer to the SOR, he acknowledged there was a 
misunderstanding on his part. He claimed he had routinely paid his bill but was unaware 
that the company split the balance into separate bills, with one for local service and 
another one for long distance service.30 Once the matter was cleared up, on May 12, 
2010, he paid the remaining balance.31 
 
 On February 20, 2010, Applicant prepared a personal financial statement 
indicating monthly net income of $9,029.47 (including military retirement), monthly 
expenses of $1,030, monthly debt repayments of $2,830.97, and a net remainder of 
$5,168.50 available for discretionary spending.32 He currently has no delinquent 
accounts.33 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
29 Item 5, supra note 2, at 20. 
 
30 Item 3, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
31 Id. at 20. 
 
32 Personal Financial Statement, dated February 20, 2010, attached to Item 5. 
 
33 The SOR did not allege that Applicant had more than the five purportedly delinquent accounts. In ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not 
alleged in an SOR may be considered stating: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3. 
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 
2003)). I have considered the non-SOR derogatory information in this decision solely to assess Applicant’s credibility 
regarding his efforts to resolve his delinquent debts, including those listed in the SOR. 
 
34 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
35 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”38 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
36 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
37 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
38 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
39 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Also, under AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” is potentially disqualifying. 
 
As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 
2004. At some unspecified point, he failed to keep up with his monthly payments, and 
accounts started to become delinquent. Some accounts were placed for collection and 
some accounts were charged off. Applicant attributed his financial situation to having 
stretched his income and living beyond his means by purchasing a house and investing 
in rental property, while paying child support. In addition, he was unemployed from 
January 2003 until September 2005. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@40 Also, when “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue,” AG ¶ 20(e) may apply. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced sometime in 2004, after he had been 
unemployed, and have now been resolved. Because his financial difficulties 
commenced six years ago, and continued until 2009, it was initially frequent and 
continuing in nature. However, Applicant eventually took the situation under control, and 
successfully resolved most of the delinquent accounts. His initial mishandling of his 
finances raised significant doubt as to his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment, but his eventual handling of his finances, under the circumstances, has 
eliminated such doubts. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because Applicant went through a lengthy period of 
unemployment from January 2003 until September 2005. However, he has furnished 
little explanation as to why his financial problems continued long after he had obtained 
employment in 2005, but failed to properly address his delinquent accounts until four 
years later. In this circumstance, it is difficult to conclude that Applicant had acted 
responsibly. 
 
AG & 20(c) applies because, while there is no evidence of Applicant ever having 
received financial counseling, there is clear and abundant evidence that his financial 
problems are resolved and are under control. He has resolved his financial problems, 
established a budget, presented a personal financial statement, and now has zero 
delinquent debts while enjoying a monthly net remainder of $5,168.50 available for 
discretionary spending.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies because Applicant addressed his delinquent debts well 
before the SOR was issued. Once those delinquent accounts were identified to him he 
immediately took positive action. As a result, the vast majority of his delinquent 
accounts were paid or resolved. Three debts were the result of identity theft and have 
been resolved; they are no longer listed on his credit report. The one remaining debt – 
the one that was charged off and sold to a debt purchaser who is now out of business – 
40 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
should not be held against him for he has made every reasonable, though unsuccessful, 
effort to locate the “creditor” and pay off the debt. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies because Applicant had a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the three past-due debts which were the result of identity theft. He reported 
his concerns to the police; reported the identity theft “fraud alert” to the credit reporting 
agencies; and he reported his concerns to the relevant creditors or their respective 
collection agencies. Upon investigation and review, at least one of the accounts was 
deemed closed and removed from his credit reports. Neither of the other two accounts 
is listed on his most recent credit report.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He lived beyond 
his means and permitted accounts to become delinquent and placed for collection or 
charged off. After years of inaction, Applicant finally started to address his delinquent 
accounts.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. Applicant 
has a history of financial delinquencies. While it is true that he failed to address his 
delinquent accounts until 2009, he finally did so with a sustained effort that resulted in 
all but one of his legitimate accounts being resolved. His efforts regarding that one 
account should not be overlooked. Applicant’s financial situation is now excellent with a 
substantial monthly net remainder available for discretionary or emergency use. I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.41 His substantial good-faith 
41 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
efforts are sufficient to mitigate continuing security concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
