 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-06726 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 11, 2009. On April 
13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 26, 2010; answered it on May 13, 2010; and 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received the request 
 
2 
 
 
on April 29, 2010. On June 8, 2010, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.) Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on June 30, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on July 7, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on July 21, 2010, scheduling it for September 1, 2010. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he presented no 
documentary evidence or witnesses. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 
10, 2010. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Pakistan. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as 
HX II. I took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. (Tr. 22.). At my 
direction, Department Counsel also presented documents to support administrative 
notice of the relevant facts about Afghanistan. (Tr. 59; HX III.) The facts administratively 
noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.c, but he denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since May 
2009. He has an interim security clearance. He was born in Afghanistan, where he 
completed college in January 1981 at government expense. He initially avoided military 
service in Afghanistan by working for the United Nations. (GX 4 at 4.) He fled to 
Pakistan in 1990 to avoid military service, after the age limit for conscription was raised. 
He left Pakistan and came to the United States in May 1998, looking for better pay, 
better schools for his children, and better health care. (Tr. 55-56). He became a U.S. 
citizen in March 2006. (GX 3 at 13; GX 4 at 1-2, 9.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he wants to work as a linguist to help himself, help the 
United States Government, and help the Afghan people. (Tr. 48.) In his counter-
intelligence screening questionnaire, he stated that he is applying for the linguist 
position to help the people of Afghanistan and because of the financial compensation. 
(GX 4 at 9.) He has not yet performed any services as a linguist because he does not 
have a clearance. (Tr. 33.) 
 
Applicant has worked as a “rental technician” for a medical supply rental agency 
since November 2004. He worked as a landscaper from August 2001 to November 
2004. (GX 1 at 16-19.) He spends his free time at home and is not involved in any 
community activities. (Tr. 47.) He did not present any performance evaluations or letters 
of recommendation from current or former employers.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant married a citizen of Afghanistan in 1988, and they have four children 
who were born in Afghanistan but are now U.S. citizens. His spouse became a U.S. 
citizen in April or May 2006 (Tr.27.). She works as a tailor. (Tr. 31; GX 4 at 4.) She and 
two of their children went to Pakistan two years ago to visit family members. She talks 
to her family members every two or three days by telephone. (Tr. 53.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents and father-in-law are deceased. His two brothers are citizens 
of Afghanistan. The older brother lives in Afghanistan and the younger lives in Pakistan. 
Applicant has not had any contact with his older brother in Afghanistan since 1989, 
when their father passed away. He knows this brother was a mechanic, but he does not 
know where his brother currently lives or works. To the best of his knowledge, his older 
brother has never held political office or served in the military. (Tr. 24; GX 2 at 5.) 
Applicant lived in Pakistan with his younger brother before coming to the United States, 
and he has email or telephone contact him about once a month. This brother is currently 
unemployed, has never held political office, and never served in the military. (GX 2 at 5-
6.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan who has resided in the 
United States with Applicant and his wife since September 2008. She is a permanent 
U.S. resident. (GX 2 at 6; Tr. 41.) Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan 
who resides in Pakistan. His three brothers-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan. One 
resides in England, and the other two reside in Pakistan. All three brothers-in-law are 
employed as mechanics. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant rents his home in the United States. He does not have any property or 
bank accounts in Afghanistan. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 In his counter-intelligence screening questionnaire, Applicant stated that he 
claims allegiance to Afghanistan and the United States. (GX 4 at 2.) At the hearing, he 
testified that if required to make a choice between the interests of Afghanistan and the 
United States, he would support the United States. (Tr. 49.) He held an Afghan 
passport, but he surrendered it to his security officer when he applied for the job as a 
linguist. (GX 4 at 3.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Afghanistan has been an independent 
nation since 1919, and it was a monarchy until a military coup in 1973. Following a 
second military coup in 1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, the 
Soviet Union invaded and occupied Afghanistan, but they were resisted by freedom 
fighters known as mujahidin. The Soviet Union withdrew in February 1989 pursuant to 
an agreement signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the U.S., and the Soviet Union. The 
mujahidin were not a party to the agreement and refused to abide by it. The result was a 
civil war among several factions, including the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban 
controlled most of Afghanistan, committed atrocities against minority populations, and 
provided sanctuary to terrorist organizations. U.S. military forces, along with forces from 
a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban out of power by November 2001. With the 
assistance and support of the U.S., a new democratic government took office in 2004. 
 
4 
 
 
 I also have noted that Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to 
the continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two 
decades of war. In spite of efforts by the U.S. and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The weak government and internal 
instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, terrorists, and insurgents to 
continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile to the U.S. Suicide bombing 
attacks continue to inflict large numbers of casualties. 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Pakistan is a parliamentary federal 
republic with whom the U.S. has had diplomatic relations since 1947. Until 1990, the 
United States provided substantial military aid to Pakistan, but it was suspended as part 
of the sanctions imposed in response to Pakistan’s nuclear weapons program. After 
September 11, 2001, the sanctions were suspended in recognition of Pakistan’s support 
for the U.S. campaign against terrorism. Many Al Qaeda and Taliban fugitives use the 
loosely-controlled border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan as a safe haven. 
Extremist groups in Pakistan target American and other Western interests, senior 
Pakistani officials, and members of minority indigenous and religious groups. Pakistan 
has a poor human rights record and suffers from wide-spread government corruption. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s brother is a citizen of Afghanistan, residing in 
Pakistan (¶ 1.a), another brother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan (¶ 1.b), his 
mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan, residing in the United States (¶ 1.c), and his 
sister-in-law and three brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan (¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.e). Applicant denied ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He testified that his sister-in-law resides in 
Pakistan, his two brothers-in-law reside in Pakistan, and one brother-in-law resides in 
England. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
6 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).  
 
 The evidence establishes that Applicant has significant family ties to Afghanistan 
and Pakistan. His two brothers are citizens of Afghanistan. His older brother resides in 
Afghanistan and his younger brother resides in Pakistan. While he has no contact with 
his older brother in Afghanistan, he communicates regularly with his younger brother in 
Pakistan, making him vulnerable to indirect coercion through his brother. Applicant’s 
mother-in-law resides with him in the United States, but his wife has frequent contact 
with her family members in Pakistan, making Applicant vulnerable to indirect coercion 
through his wife.  
 
 I conclude that Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan and Pakistan raise three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 7(a) (“contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion”); AG ¶ 7(b) (“connections 
to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of 
 
7 
 
 
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information”); and AG ¶ 7(d) (“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, 
regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”). There is no evidence that either 
Afghanistan or Pakistan target the United States for military or economic intelligence. 
However, the presence of hostile terrorist and insurgent organizations in both countries, 
Applicant’s close ties with his younger brother, and his wife’s close ties with her family 
members in Pakistan create the “heightened risk” contemplated by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) 
and the “potential conflict of interest” contemplated by AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant’s wife and mother-in-law reside with him in the United 
States, making it unlikely that they would be forced by terrorists or insurgents to make 
the hard choice between foreign interests and the interests of the United States. 
However, the presence of hostile terrorist and insurgent groups in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, Applicant’s close relationship with his brother in Pakistan, and his wife’s close 
relationships with family members in Pakistan preclude application of this mitigating 
condition. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant, his wife, and his children are U.S. citizens. However, Applicant presented no 
evidence of community involvement, good duty performance, or a reputation for 
reliability and trustworthiness. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is not established, because 
Applicant has failed to show that his relationships and loyalties in the United States are 
so deep and longstanding that he would resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
 
8 
 
 
foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
This mitigating condition is established for Applicant’s older brother in Afghanistan, with 
whom he has no contact. It is not established, however, for his contacts with his 
younger brother in Pakistan or his wife’s contacts with her family members in Pakistan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, educated adult. He came to the United States seeking a 
better life for himself and his family. Part of his motivation for seeking work as a linguist 
is economic. He was sincere and candid at the hearing. He and his wife have minimal 
connections to Afghanistan, but they both have strong family ties in Pakistan. He has no 
track record of working in an environment where strict adherence to rules and 
regulations is required. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the foreign influence concern raised by the citizenship and residence of his 
mother-in-law and his older brother in Afghanistan, but he has not mitigated the foreign 
influence concern raised by his younger brother, sister-in-law, and two brothers-in-law 
residing in Pakistan. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
