  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-05577 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was more than 120 days past due on a home equity loan and mortgage 
on investment property. He also owed $9,000 in delinquent property taxes. The property 
taxes are now current and the property has gone to a short sale. Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 26, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
 
  On May 10, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated June 10, 2010. The FORM contained 11 
attachments, listed as Government exhibits (Ex.). On June 17, 2010, Applicant received 
a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying condition.  
 
On July 12, 2010, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did 
not object to the material. Applicant's response was admitted into the record as Ex. A 
and B. On August 6, 2010, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing the SOR debts. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old mechanical engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2007. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In April 2005, Applicant purchased a $510,650 second house, with which he 
intended to generate rental income. (Ex. 3, B) His renter fell behind on his payments 
and filed for bankruptcy protection. Applicant was more than 120 days past due on his 
$63,800 home equity line of credit. He was $2,414 delinquent on the line of credit and 
$21,169 delinquent on his mortgage. He was more than 120 days past due on his 
$552,000 mortgage. He also owed $9,000 in delinquent property tax. He decided to 
proceed with a short sale2 on the property. As of May 2010, Applicant had a potential 
buyer having actively pursued short sale process for approximately a year.  
2 A short sale is a sale of real estate in which the proceeds from the sale fall short of the balance owed on 
a loan secured by the property sold. In a short sale, the bank or mortgage lender agrees to discount the 
loan balance because of an economic or financial hardship on the part of the mortgagor. The home 
owner/debtor sells the mortgaged property for less than the outstanding balance of the loan, and turns 
over the proceeds of the sale to the lender, sometimes (but not always) in full satisfaction of the debt. In 
such instances, the lender would have the right to approve or disapprove of a proposed sale.  
A short sale typically is executed to prevent a home foreclosure. The decision to proceed with a short sale 
is predicated on the most economic way for the bank to recover the amount owed on the property. Often 
a bank will allow a short sale if they believe that it will result in a smaller financial loss than foreclosing. A 
short sale is typically faster and less expensive than a foreclosure.  
A short sale is nothing more than negotiation with lien holders a payoff for less than what they are owed, 
or rather a sale of a debt, generally on a piece of real estate, short of the full debt amount. It does not 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 In May 2009, Applicant entered into a residential listing agreement to sell the 
home for not less than $315,000. (Ex. A) On June 17, 2010, a couple offered to buy the 
property for $350,000. (Ex. A) The buyers signed the short sale addendum notifying 
them that the agreement was contingent upon the seller’s receipt of written consent 
from all existing secured lenders and lien holders. (Ex. A) Settlement was to take place 
on September 22, 2010. (Ex. B) Since the record closed in July 2010, there is no 
evidence the home went to settlement as planned.  
 
 The mortgage company paid $8,508 to bring the property tax owed on the home 
current. (Ex. B) As of May 28, 2010, $552,410 was owed on the property. An escrow 
amount of $2,081 was being held to pay additional property tax. At settlement, $1,738 in 
county taxes was to be paid representing the taxes due from July 1, 2010 through 
September 22, 2010.  
 
 As of November 2009, Applicant’s monthly net income was $5,200, his monthly 
expenses were $1,350, and his monthly debt payment was $3,800. Leaving a monthly 
net remainder of $50. (Ex. 8) He was paying $3,500 monthly on his home mortgage 
loan on which he owed $630,000 and was paying $300 monthly on his $10,000 student 
loan. His June 2009-credit bureau report (CBR) indicates he pays his mortgage as 
agreed. (Ex. 6)  
 
Provisions under the Anti-Deficiency Statute, Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 580(b)3 do 
not apply to this transaction because the property was purchased as rental property and 
there is no evidence Applicant occupied the property.  
 
 
 
 
 
extinguish the remaining balance unless settlement is clearly indicated on the acceptance of offer. Short 
sales are common in standard business transactions in recognition that creditors are not doing debtors a 
favor but, rather, engaging in a business transaction when extending credit.  
3 Under California law, the Anti-Deficiency Statute, Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 580(b) states in relevant part: 
  
No deficiency judgment shall lie in any event after a sale of real property or an estate for 
years therein for failure of the purchaser to complete his or her contract of sale, or under 
a deed of trust or mortgage given to the vendor to secure payment of the balance of the 
purchase price of that real property or estate for years therein, or under a deed of trust or 
mortgage on a dwelling for not more than four families given to a lender to secure 
repayment of a loan which was in fact used to pay all or part of the purchase price of that 
dwelling occupied, entirely or in part, by the purchaser. 
 
Under this section, generally if there is a foreclosure on a dwelling and there is a deficiency, the lender 
has no recourse regarding “purchase money loans,” also called “non-recourse loans.” The amounts set 
forth in both the 1st and the 2nd mortgages used to finance the dwelling purchase are not enforceable by 
a deficiency judgment. The collateral or dwelling is considered full satisfaction of the debt, upon 
foreclosure.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant had a home equity line of credit and mortgage, which totaled 
approximately $616,000 on which he was more than 120 days past due. Additionally, he 
owed $9,000 in delinquent property taxes. The evidence supports application of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19 (a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (d) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant purchased the rental/investment property in 2005. At the time of 
purchase, this was considered a good investment strategy. He fell behind on his 
payments when his renter defaulted on the lease. For more than a year, he aggressively 
sought to find a buyer to purchase the property. He has recently found a buyer. 
 
The mitigating conditions of AG ¶ 20(a) have limited application. Even though the 
property was purchased in 2005, the debts are considered recent because the property 
has only recently gone to short sale. However, the behavior happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.  
 
The conditions listed in AG & 20(b) apply. The financial problems were largely 
beyond his control. The real estate markets nationwide have suffered greatly, which 
was a factor beyond his control. He could not have anticipated the drastic change in the 
real estate market when he purchased the property in 2005 for $510,000. He currently 
owed $616,000 on his home equity line of credit and mortgage. The property went to 
short sale for $350,000. Once he realized the problem, he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. For more than a year he sought a new purchaser for the property and 
finally found one.  
 
The mitigating conditions of AG ¶ 20(c) have limited application. Although there 
is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, there is some indication his 
financial problems are being resolved. There is a contract on the property and it was to 
go to closing on September 2010. Considering how Applicant has pursued the short 
sale of the property, it can be assumed should the closing not occur he will aggressively 
seek a new purchaser. Except for the real estate, there has been no showing Applicant 
has experienced a problem with any other lender or account. None of his other 
accounts are delinquent. He is current on his home mortgage, utilities, and vehicle 
loans. 
 
Under AG & 20(d), Applicant has a purchaser for a short sale on the property. A 
short sale is a standard business transaction in which the creditor is not doing the 
Applicant a favor, but has engaged in a business transaction to recover some funds on 
the transaction. Under AG & 20(d) this would constitute, “or otherwise resolve debts.” 
AG & 20(d) applies. 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
The issue is whether Applicant’s financial circumstances raise concerns about 
his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a) (1).) I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. The debts were not incurred on luxuries. At the time of purchase, 
buying the rental property was considered a good investment strategy. The dramatic 
loss in fair market value of the property could not have been foreseen in 2005, when the 
property was purchased. The downturn of the real estate market nationwide was 
beyond his control.  
 
The property has gone to short sale and his financial liability as to the house has 
been addressed. His past conduct in securing a purchaser for the short sale indicates 
he will be just as aggressive in attempting to find another purchaser should the closing 
not occur. There is no showing he is unable to address his other financial obligations in 
a timely manner.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
8 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
