 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08472 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 4, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the guideline for Drug Involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 14, 2010, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
Items, and mailed her a complete copy on May 18, 2010. Applicant received the FORM 
on July 19, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant did not file a response. On October 12, 2010, DOHA 
assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Her admission is incorporated into the findings herein.   
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and married. She has three children, ages 23, 22, and 
19.  In July 2009, she began a position as a software engineer for a defense contractor. 
 
 Applicant has a history of using marijuana, an illegal drug. In 1985, she used it 
with her husband to celebrate their anniversary while vacationing in a Caribbean 
country. From 2005 to July 2009, she used it two or three times a year with her husband 
at home. She has not sold or distributed it. She has not participated in substance abuse 
treatment or been diagnosed as having a drug abuse problem. She does not believe 
that she has a drug habit. Only her husband and brother are aware of her usage. 
   
 In her Answer, Applicant stated that she “will certainly never use it again.” (Item 
4.) She apologized for wasting government resources on her case. (Id.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
 
3 
 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and; (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of 
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
This guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Based 
on Applicant’s admissions that she used marijuana in 1985, and then again occasionally 
for four years, the Government raised a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 25(a), “any 
drug abuse (see above definition).” 
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 26 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising 
from illegal drug use: 
 
4 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
 clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply because Applicant regularly used illegal drugs from 
2005 to July 2009. Given the frequency and four-year history of marijuana use, her 
behavior casts doubt on her current trustworthiness and good judgment. Other than an 
assertion in her Answer that she did not intend to use it in the future, she failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate her intention not use it in the future and 
warrant the application of AG ¶ 25(b). Applicant’s uncorroborated statements that she 
has not used marijuana since July 2009 are not sufficient evidence to establish an 
appropriate period of abstinence in view of her years of use. The record does not 
contain evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 25(c). Applicant has not participated 
in substance abuse treatment, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 
25(d).  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
5 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 55-year-old married 
woman and mother of three young adult children, who illegally used marijuana over four 
years. She used it with her husband and her children are unaware of her conduct. She 
was candid about her mistake and seemingly remorseful about her illegal behavior. 
Nonetheless, her four-year usage, albeit periodically, raises concerns about her 
reliability, judgment, and ability to comply with rules and regulations. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
