 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01782 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on  
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on April 5, 2010, and he 
elected to have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 28, 2010. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and he received it on August 1, 2010. Applicant was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided an undated letter and an email dated 
August 25, 2010. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all the allegations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He is married and has no children. He is a consultant to 
a federal contractor. He works in the information technology field (IT). This is the first 
time he has sought a security clearance. He has deployed to both Iraq and Afghanistan 
as a federal contractor supporting United States forces in those locations.1   
  
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his 2005-2007 federal and state tax 
returns (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b), and that he owes $11,347 to a government agency on a 
collection account (SOR ¶ 1.c). In 1999, Applicant suffered a workplace injury for which 
he sought workman’s compensation. Additionally, because of the injury suffered, he 
applied for and received social security disability benefits. Beginning in either late 2000 
or early 2001, he received social security benefits in the amount of $1,000 per month. In 
October of 2001, he was able to resume employment and contacted the Social Security 
Administration (SSA) to stop his disability payments. According to the Applicant, he 
received his last benefit check in about December 2001. The SSA claims that he 
continued receiving benefit checks for an extended period. There is no SSA 
documentation of these payments other than the entries on Applicant’s credit reports 
showing a government debt as a collection account.2 
  
 In either 2004 or 2005, Applicant received a letter from the SSA asking him to 
contact them. He did so and was informed he had received an overpayment of benefits. 
Applicant claims he did not receive any additional payments after December 2001. After 
updating his address with the SSA in May 2005, Applicant received several checks from 
the SSA in excess of $40,000. Applicant knew he was not entitled to these checks and 
immediately contacted the SSA about the overpayments. He did not cash the checks. In 
March 2006, Applicant returned all the checks to the SSA he had received to date, 
amounting to $42,396. The SSA maintains that Applicant received a total of $53,743 in 
overpayment benefits and he still owes $11,374. Applicant disputes owing this amount 
and hypothesizes the SSA sent the disputed checks to an incorrect address because he 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 4, 13. 
 
 
3 
 
 
has never received those checks. As of July 2009, Applicant and the SSA were working 
to schedule a mediation to resolve this dispute. Applicant’s overseas work schedule has 
complicated scheduling the mediation.3  
 
 Because of the disputed social security amounts, which the IRS was treating as 
income, Applicant did not file his 2005-2007 federal or state income tax returns at the 
time they were due. He hired an accounting firm to sort out his tax issues. He has 
provided documentation showing he has filed and paid his 2005-2007 federal and state 
income tax obligations. Applicant filed and paid his federal returns in August, September 
and November 2009. He filed and paid his state returns in October and November 
2009. All these actions preceded the issuance of the SOR in this case.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
3 Items 4, 9, 10, 13. 
 
4 Items 4; Response to FORM. 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant has an $11,347 delinquent debt that remains unpaid or unresolved. He 
also failed to timely file both his federal and state income tax returns for 2005-2007. I 
find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant resolved both his federal and state tax obligations for the years in 
question by November 2009 when he filed and paid what he owed. His failure to timely 
file his tax returns happened under unusual circumstances, namely, the inclusion of 
social security benefits as taxable income by the IRS, and is unlikely to recur. 
Additionally, his delayed filing of taxes (until an accountant could sort things) out does 
not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find mitigating 
condition AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
 Applicant has a reasonable basis to dispute the remaining social security debt. 
He claims he never received the money in question. His turning over $40,000 worth of 
checks to the SSA that he received through their bureaucratic error persuades me that 
he did not receive the additional checks. Based upon his previous track record, I can 
infer that had he received them, he would have also turned them back over to the SSA. 
He also is currently seeking mediation for this disputed debt. I find AG ¶ 20(e) applies to 
SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances by 
which the SSA mistakenly sent him funds to which he was not entitled. I considered how 
he promptly returned those funds. I also considered how that error by the SSA impacted 
his tax obligations for the next several years. Finally, I considered Applicant’s 
deployments to hostile places in support of United States military forces. Applicant 
provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
