                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07741 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, 
but failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E 
and B. On September 7, 2010, DOHA filed an amended SOR. The actions were taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SORs in writing on August 4, 2010 and September 15, 
2010. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on September 13, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
September 21, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 20, 2010. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted into evidence. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of 
certain facts relating to India as contained in Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not 
object and I took administrative notice of the documents. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. Applicant did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on October 27, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and admitted the 
allegations in ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He married in 1994. He was born in India and became 
a naturalized United States citizen in 2003. His wife is a citizen of the United States. His 
children, ages 12 and 10, are both United States citizens. Applicant holds a bachelor’s 
degree and two master’s degrees. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor 
since August 2008. He has a Top Secret security clearance.1  
 
Applicant stated that work was assigned to him by his manager, from August 
2008 until approximately January 2009, when his manager went on maternity leave. He 
explained once his manager left for maternity leave he was not assigned work. 2 
 
 Applicant stated that “now and then” he accessed the internet at work, usually for 
15 minutes every two hours.3 He stated most of his internet usage was on approved 
sites. He consistently did this over a two and a half month period. He estimated that out 
of a 40-hour work week during this period, he would work an average of about seven to 
eight hours, five hours would be used to view the internet, and the remaining 27 hours 
he had no work to do, so he read work-related material. He charged his government 
client for the full 40-hour workweek, even though he did not do work for them. He 
admitted he charged the government client for work he did not do. He explained he was 
a salaried employee of his company and this was the only way he could get paid. He did 
not have a reasonable explanation for charging his government client for work he did 
not do, other than to state that it was his company’s fault because they did not give him 
any work. Applicant stated he did not know that he should not charge customers when 
work was not performed.4  
 
1 Tr. 36, 39-40, 94-97. 
 
2 Tr. 22-23. 
 
3 Tr. 23-24. 
 
4 Tr. 28-35, 46-52, 99-101-102. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In late March 2009, an investigation was started by his company because they 
were suspicious that Applicant was spending an inordinate amount of time on the 
internet. His government-owned computer utilized an unclassified network. Their 
investigation revealed that numerous sites Applicant accessed from his company’s 
account were inappropriate in the workplace. The investigation revealed one sample 
representing a one hour and fifty minute time span, generating 82 pages of sites that 
were accessed on March 3, 2009, between 8:17 a.m. and 10:05 a.m. Examples noted in 
the investigation of site searches were for “erotic services.” One site contained 
pornographic pictures of women and advertisements for erotic services. The 
investigation reviewed a two-week sample that was retrieved from Applicant’s computer, 
indicating hundreds of “hits” to the erotic services site. It further noted that Applicant 
accessed the internet in the morning and continually clicked on different sites 
throughout the day until he left work. Applicant denied he had hundreds of “hits” but 
rather he thought it was less than a hundred, and more likely “in the tens.”5  
 
 Applicant stated he left his internet on all day. He denied he spent any more time 
on the internet than 15 minutes every two-hour period. He did this four to five times a 
day. He stated that he spent the rest of the day reading. He believes the investigation is 
incorrect and that the 82-page list of “hits” is inaccurate. He thinks it is closer to 30 
pages. His explanation is that there may have been automatic pop-ups on the 
computer. The investigation revealed that these sites were accessed through “search” 
questions. He does not know how his computer registered these entries. He denied he 
accessed a website about obtaining sex in Latin countries. He admitted he accessed 
Craigslist, but stated he was searching for a fish tank. He believes he was inadvertently 
diverted to the personal ads of the site. He admitted that on two to three occasions he 
went to the Craigslist website personal ads section, but he was reading the ads 
because he thought they were funny. He denied he intentionally accessed the site to 
view pornography, although it was on the website. He admitted he saw pornography on 
the website, but not all the time. His stated his access was accidental. His explanation 
for going back to a website that might be inappropriate was that if the site was not 
blocked by the information technology (IT) personnel at his place of employment, then it 
was permissible to access. He also explained he went back to the site because he did 
not have any work to do and his access was brief.6 
 
 Applicant explained that it is the company’s IT personnel’s job to block 
inappropriate websites. His asserted that if they did not block the website, he assumed 
it was appropriate to view regardless of content. He believed he has no personal 
responsibility or accountability for accessing a website that was not blocked.7  
 
Applicant denied he was ever informed of his company internet policy regarding 
personal use. He denied he ever was provided a copy of the policy, read it, or was told 
5 Tr. 41-46, 111-113. 
 
6 Tr.23-28, 36, 41-45, 61-67, 72-73. 
 
7 Tr. 67, 73-76, 103-111, 115. 
 
4 
 
 
policy.
related sites. He was terminated from his 
mployment in April 2009 for his actions. 
him his internet use was a 
roblem. Applicant never shared his password with anyone.9 
is employer that he was terminated because of his 
appropriate use of the internet.10  
blocked. He told the investigator that he knew it was wrong, but did not think the 
                                                          
to review it. He did not ask about the policy. He understood that viewing pornography at 
work was inappropriate and there was a policy against viewing pornography and hate 
websites. He acknowledged being provided with the government client’s internet 
8  
 
In March 2009, Applicant was suspended without pay during the investigation for 
accessing inappropriate internet sites and charging the U.S. Government for time 
worked while accessing the non-work 
e
 
 Applicant believed his privacy was violated by his company, when he learned 
they had researched the websites he was accessing from the internet on his work 
computer during working hours. He believed he should have been told that the company 
was monitoring his usage. He was upset that the company was “checking up” on him. 
He reiterated his position that the IT people should have prevented him from accessing 
inappropriate websites. He stated he believed he was not doing anything inappropriate 
because no one told him not to. He is upset that no one told 
p
 
 In his interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator, he 
explained that he was told by his supervisor that he was terminated from employment 
because he accessed the website Craigslist’s personal section. When first questioned 
at this hearing, Applicant stated he did not know why he was terminated from his job. 
Later, he admitted he was told by h
in
 
 During the company’s investigation, Applicant was provided a sample of the site 
listings retrieved from his account. He acknowledged to the investigator that he visited 
the sites. He also mentioned he had an addiction and he wanted to know if the company 
would give him an exception to using the internet. He believes he is addicted to the 
internet because his line of work is very tedious and complicated, and the internet 
refreshes and relaxes him. He acknowledged he had been to the Craigslist site. He was 
looking at classified ads and clicked on some and this is what led him to view 
inappropriate pictures. He told the investigator that since he got through, there must not 
be a problem accessing the site. He also suggested to the investigator that it was not 
his fault. He stated that if the IT group had made him aware that it was not an 
appropriate website, he would have stopped accessing the sites. He stated he needed 
the internet to do his job. At his previous employment, the pornographic sites were 
8 Tr. 69-71, 97-99, 113-114; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 68, 103-111. 
 
10 Tr. 33-36, 55-57. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
company was looking at [the] activity. He admitted to the investigator that he made a 
mistake when he went to the sites and it was “bad.”11  
 
 When asked by the company’s investigator how he charged his time when he 
was looking at these sites, he stated that he did not do anything different. He charged 
his time to whatever task he was assigned.12  
 
 Applicant’s testimony throughout the hearing was not credible. He consistently 
lacked candor. His statements were repeatedly inconsistent. He did not understand that 
charging the government client when he was not doing work for them was inappropriate 
and likely illegal. His position was that if he did not charge the government client he 
would not get paid.  
 
 Applicant has not disclosed to his wife why he was terminated from employment 
with this company. His wife does not know he accessed inappropriate websites. He did 
not tell her because “I just look at those sites, I didn’t do anything.”13 He acknowledged 
it would cause problems if he told his wife the truth about his termination. He stated he 
told his wife that the contract he was working on was finished and he was waiting for a 
new one. He did not disclose to his present employer why he was terminated from 
employment with his former employer.14  
 
 Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens and residents of India. His mother 
was a teacher and retired about ten years ago. Applicant’s father passed away in May 
2010. His mother received an inheritance from his father. He was a retired college 
administrator. He did not receive a pension. She owns an apartment and Applicant’s 
brother helps her financially. Applicant does not provide her financial support. His 
brother runs an information technology company. It is a private company and he has no 
government contacts. He is married and has two children. His wife does not work 
outside the home. Applicant’s sister and brother-in-law both work for a college as 
instructors. They have one child.15  
 
 Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and residents of India. His father-in-law is a 
retired bank general manager. The banks are all nationalized in India. He receives a 
pension. His mother-in-law is a home maker. Applicant and his wife do not provide 
financial support to her parents.16  
11 Tr. 61-70, 91-92, 102-111; GE 2. 
 
12 GE 2.  
 
13 Tr. 57. 
 
14 Tr. 52-61. 
 
15 Tr. 80, 89. 
 
16 Tr. 89-91. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant traveled to India in 2010 to attend his father’s funeral. He spent four 
weeks in India in 2009 and traveled there in 2004. He sees his family while there. His 
family is aware that he holds a security clearance. He owns no property or investments 
in India, but has a bank account that has about $8,000. He uses the account when he is 
in India and he receives a better foreign exchange rate. He has assets totaling 
approximately $650,000 in the United States.17  
 
India18 
 
 India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, 
federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of 
approximately 1.1 billion. 
 
 The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were committed in recent 
yeas by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, terrorists coordinated an 
attack at a hotel in Mumbai frequented by westerners.  
 
 The United States recognizes India as key to its strategic interests and has 
sought to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
 There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. In March 
2008, an American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally exporting 
technology to entities in India.  
 
 The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
collaborative future. The United States and India seek to elevate the strategic 
17 Tr. 82-86, 93-94. 
 
18 HE I. 
 
7 
 
 
partnership further to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and 
joint democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
8 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have especially considered the following: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standings. 
 
 Applicant was suspended from work without pay for accessing inappropriate sites 
on the internet and charging the U.S. Government for time worked while accessing non-
work related internet sites. This was in violation of his company’s policies. He was later 
terminated from employment. Applicant deliberately provided false information to his 
employer when he denied accessing inappropriate websites. He has concealed the 
reason for his employment termination from his wife. I find these disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered all the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and the 
following three potentially apply: 
 
9 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant misused the internet, and charged a government client for work not 
done for over two months. Applicant refused to take responsibility for his wrongful 
actions. He did not comprehend that charging a client for work that was not done is 
wrong, unethical, and illegal. He did not take responsibility for intentionally accessing 
inappropriate internet sites. Rather, he blamed the IT personnel for allowing him to 
access such sites. He provided false information to his employer and did not correct his 
falsifications before being confronted with the facts. Applicant has concealed his 
employment termination from his wife. He failed to show positive steps he has taken to 
reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I have 
considered all of the evidence and conclude none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
10 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s mother, parents-in-law, brother and sister are citizens and residents 
of India. Applicant maintains some contact with his family living there. His mother is self-
sufficient, living off an inheritance. Applicant’s brother may assist his mother. His brother 
is employed in private industry. His father-in-law receives a pension through a national 
bank, and his mother-in-law is a homemaker. Applicant visits India periodically. 
Applicant has some assets in India. His connections to family members in India could 
potentially create a heightened risk of foreign influence or potential conflict of interest. 
The above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
11 
 
 
 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant has family members who are citizens 
and residents of India. The United States maintains close relations with India. Applicant 
maintains some contact with his family and his wife’s family in India. When he visits 
India he stays with his family. Based on the nature of his contacts, I cannot conclude 
that his relationship with his family is casual and infrequent. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 8(c) 
does not apply.  
  
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. India has a close and friendly relationship 
with the United States. They are the two largest democracies in the world. Although 
India has had some human rights issues and some terrorist incidents, it does not 
appear that these involved exploiting their citizens. India is an active collector of U.S. 
economic intelligence. However, there is no indication that they target or exploit their 
own citizens to obtain it. It is also very unlikely that Applicant would be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and his family in India. Based on India’s 
relationship with the United States, it is very unlikely that intelligence officials would 
attempt to pressure Applicant’s family to gather valuable or classified information from 
the U.S through Applicant. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
All except Applicant’s father-in-law, who is retired from working at a nationalize 
bank, have no known ties to the Indian government. I do not find Applicant’s relationship 
with his family in India or his infrequent visits there create a heightened security risk. 
There is no evidence that India pressures its citizens to obtain classified information, 
and it is highly unlikely Applicant would have to choose between loyalty to his family in 
India and the United States.  
 
 Applicant has been an American citizen since 2003. His children are U.S. 
citizens, having been born here. His wife is also a U.S. citizen. Although he has 
relatives living in India, he also has his immediate family living in the United States. 
Almost all of his financial assets are located in the United States. He has minimal assets 
in India. His ties to the United States are significant. I find that Applicant is loyal to the 
United States and he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor it. 
Therefore, I find mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(b) and (f) apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 
(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant charged the U.S. Government for work he did not do. He failed to understand 
why his conduct is a security concern. He did not take responsibility for his actions when 
he accessed inappropriate websites on the internet. He did not grasp that his conduct 
was wrong and unethical. He was upset that his computer was being monitored by his 
company, which is how they learned of his conduct. Applicant’s refusal to accept 
responsibility for his conduct raised a serious personal conduct security concerns 
involving his judgment. Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion on this issue. 
However, Applicant’s contact with family in India is not security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Personal Conduct. He has successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for Foreign Influence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
