1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-04014
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq.   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
that Applicant—in reaction to learning of his wife’s infidelity—demonstrated
questionable judgment by engaging in a pattern of odd if not bizarre conduct during
2002–2004 that, while falling short of the criminal offense of attempt, consisted of
preparatory steps (for example, buying a firearm and digging graves) to carry out the
murder of his wife’s paramour. Applicant remains married to his wife and has had
individual and marriage counseling for the last several years to present.  He has made
great strides in counseling and his marriage is vastly improved. Nevertheless,
insufficient time has passed to fully mitigate the security concerns raised by his
questionable judgment. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is
decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibit B and testimony of character witness. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 24,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline E for personal conduct. The SOR also recommended that the case
be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s
security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing.
Thereafter, the SOR was amended on August 6, 2010, by adding new language for ¶
1.a and by withdrawing ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. The case was assigned to me August 10, 2010.
The hearing took place September 13, 2010. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received
September 20, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a federal contractor. An electrical
engineer by training, he is a manager of a system engineering group. He has worked for
the same company since 1997. He has an excellent employment record as shown by
the favorable evidence produced during the hearing.  He has been married to the same2
woman for more than 30 years. He and his spouse have four children, the first two were
adopted and the second two were their own. The children are now young adults
between the ages of 24 and 19. 
In 2002, Applicant’s spouse revealed to him that she had a multiple-year affair
with a coworker. The coworker was also a trusted family friend of Applicant as both
families interacted on a regular basis. This news proved devastating to Applicant, as he
felt betrayed by both his spouse and the family friend. In particular, Applicant’s spouse
had tried to end the affair a few years earlier, but her paramour threatened her with
disclosure of the affair. Based on this information, Applicant felt his spouse had been
blackmailed to continue the affair, and this circumstance greatly angered Applicant. 
Following the revelation in 2002, Applicant initially sought and participated in
counseling, but discussing the situation proved too difficult and he discontinued
 Exhibit A-1. 3
 Tr. 91–92. 4
 Exhibit 2 at 99–100. 5
3
counseling. Within the next few months, Applicant purchased a firearm, a pistol, and
took the required safety course, which included firing the weapon. He never purchased
ammunition for the firearm and never fired it again. He told his spouse he bought the
firearm because he knew doing so would upset her. Buying the firearm was part of a
revenge fantasy of taking action against his spouse’s paramour that preoccupied
Applicant for the next couple of years. In addition to buying the firearm, it included grave
digging (two graves located in the woods), buying a cutting tool, and buying a canvas to
wrap the body. 
Applicant’s digging took place, weather permitting, during the months of about
May–September on Saturdays when his spouse was at work. His spouse was aware of
his digging activity in general because he bought a collapsible shovel for the task and
he would put his dirt-covered clothing in the laundry. Applicant was careful in selecting a
site in the woods where he thought his grave-digging activity would not be detected.
Likewise, he brought along a book about fossils in the local region to use as a cover
story in case he had to explain his digging. Toward the end of the first summer in 2002,
he had the impression that someone had discovered the hole, and so he found a new
location in the same woods and began digging a second grave. His digging followed the
same pattern in 2003 and 2004, when it ended. Applicant never confronted the
paramour directly and spoke to him but once in 2002 on the telephone. Likewise,
Applicant never went to the paramour’s home or place of work with the firearm or any
other weapon. Applicant also sold the firearm and resumed counseling, which he has
continued on a fairly regular basis until present.  In addition, Applicant confessed his3
thoughts and actions to a priest in about 2003 or 2004.4
Applicant’s activities went undiscovered until about October 2004, when he
disclosed the information under questioning by another governmental agency that was
processing him for access to sensitive compartmental information (SCI). During
subsequent processing and questioning, Applicant disclosed additional derogatory
information, to include the following: (1) in 2002, he considered buying a suppressor
(silencer) for his firearm, but did not pursue it when he discovered doing so was illegal
in his state of residence; (2) in 2003, Applicant’s good friend told him that his wife was
having an affair, and Applicant offered his help to his friend in killing the paramour,
although neither man took any action to do so; (3) from the early 1990s to about 2003,
Applicant masturbated, about six times, undetected, in his office at work; and (4) from
the early 1990s to about 2000, Applicant masturbated about 30 times, undetected, while
driving his car.  5
 Exhibits A-2 and A-3. 6
 Exhibit A-3. 7
 Exhibit A-3 at 4 of evaluation. 8
 Exhibit A-3 at 9 of evaluation. 9
 Exhibit A-2. 10
4
In due course, Applicant was denied access to SCI by another governmental
agency in 2005, and his access to SCI was revoked by a second governmental agency
in 2006. Applicant had two psychological evaluations while contesting these actions.  6
The first evaluation took place in February 2005, at Applicant’s attorney’s
request, and was conducted by a clinical psychologist experienced in clinical and
forensic psychology.  The evaluation concluded that Applicant was not in need of7
mental-health treatment, but was well advised to continue counseling. The evaluation
characterized Applicant’s grave-digging activity as “ritualistic behavior [that] is more or
less healthy expression of overwhelming feelings. The obsessive compulsive ritual
serves the purpose of a non-aggressive expression of emotional anguish and affords
relief from the pain of a traumatic experience.”  Also, the evaluation concluded that8
Applicant’s grave-digging activity was “an anxiety driven, compulsive ritual that caused
no harm to anyone other than to [Applicant] and perhaps to his wife.”9
The second evaluation took place in July 2005, at request of another government
agency, and was conducted by a clinical psychologist.  The evaluation concluded that10
Applicant did not meet the criteria for any diagnosable mental disorder that would impair
his functioning, but Applicant did have obsessive compulsive personality traits. The
evaluation agreed that Applicant’s behavior was best explained by the description of the
February 2005 evaluation in that the actual motivation of Applicant’s behavior was to
antagonize his wife due to his inability to have direct and straightforward communication
with his wife. The evaluation went into some detail on this point as follows:
In essence, the poor communication between [Applicant] and his wife led
him to use such an indirect approach to make her aware of his anger
regarding the [affair]. It appears that he also hoped that his action would
upset his wife, as he felt that she had coped with her feelings of guilt more
quickly than was appropriate. Although [his] behavior is certainly
concerning and highly unusual, there is little evidence that he plans to
engage in violent behavior in the future. There is no known history of
significant violent behavior in [his] past, considerable time has passed
since he became aware of his wife’s infidelity, and he is actively engaged
in treatment at present. In addition, there is a relatively small chance that
such a significant and distressing trigger as discovering his wife’s infidelity
will recur in [his] life in the future. There appears to be a Moderate risk that
[he] would engage in behavior indicative of poor judgment, impulsivity, or
 Exhibit A-2 at 10 of evaluation. 11
 Exhibit A-1 at 3 of evaluation. 12
 Tr. 121–122. 13
 Tr. 122. 14
 Tr. 112. 15
 Tr. 92. 16
 Tr. 92–93. 17
 Tr. 94. 18
 Tr. 94. 19
5
irresponsibility in the future. For example, if he were to experience another
significant stressor, [Applicant] may engage in inappropriate or unusual
behavior, but it appears unlikely that violent or illegal behavior would
result. As more time passes since the digging behavior, his risk level will
continue to decrease.    11
Applicant’s current psychologist testified at the hearing and presented a written
report as well. The psychologist is of the view that Applicant’s lengthy therapy has
helped him learn to understand and accept his anger and his needs, that he has learned
and is learning better ways to express his feelings, and that he better understands the
importance of sharing his feelings with his wife and encouraging her to do the same, all
of which have improved Applicant’s marriage.  The psychologist opined that Applicant12
has features of obsessive compulsive personality disorder, but does not qualify for a
valid diagnosis.  The psychologist also opined that Applicant’s grave-digging activity13
and associated mock preparations were indicative of an adjustment disorder.  And the14
psychologist opined that there is no risk that Applicant would engage in similar
behavior.   15
Other than the expected stress due to this case, Applicant reports that he now
feels great, he believes his family (a huge priority for him) is on the right track, he has a
good marriage and relationship with his wife, and his life at work is going well.  In short,16
Applicant stated that his life is the best it has been since he can remember.  He17
admitted having a fantasy of killing his wife’s paramour and digging his grave, but he
denies any intent to carry it out.  He acknowledged that it now sounds ridiculous18
considering all the effort he put forth, but he felt he had to do something at the time.19
Concerning his statement about being willing to help his friend kill another man in 2003,
Applicant denied any intention to engage in violence. He characterized it as a macho,
nonsense statement that he made to express solidarity with and support for his friend
 Tr. 68–70. 20
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to21
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.22
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 23
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 24
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.26
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.27
6
who was going through a similar difficult experience.  Applicant’s explanation is20
accepted as credible, and this matter, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, is resolved in his favor.
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As21
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt22
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An23
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  24
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting25
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An26
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate27
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.28
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 29
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).30
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.31
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).32
 AG ¶ 15. 33
7
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme28
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.29
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.30
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it31
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be32
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is that:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  33
In assessing the evidence, I have considered the following disqualifying
conditions under the guideline:
8
16(c) Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
16(d) Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources; and 
16(e) Personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or
intelligence service or other group.
Likewise, in assessing the evidence, I have considered the following mitigating
circumstances under the guideline:
17(c) The offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
 Exhibit 2 at 120. 34
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9). 35
9
17(d) The individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur; and
17(e) The individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
My assessment of the evidence is largely consistent with an assessment by a
security official from another governmental agency who reviewed Applicant’s case in
2006.  That official’s assessment is not binding, but it does inform my decision-making34
process. Applicant’s grave-digging activity and associated mock preparations—while
perhaps an acceptable means of coping with the emotions he felt when he learned
about his wife’s infidelity in 2002—went on far too long and was far too extensive to be
viewed as a minor aberration. His activities were not isolated, short-term events, but
were sustained and planned actions (for example, using the book as a potential cover
story). His conduct, even though it took place some years ago, continues to impugn his
trustworthiness and good judgment. The same may be said of his masturbation in
locations where one may not expect privacy and there is a risk of exposure. Taken
together, Applicant’s conduct indicates a willingness to engage in high-risk activity while
at the same time holding a security clearance.
  
To conclude, following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, the evidence as
a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the factors under the
whole-person concept  and note that Applicant was subjected to one of life’s most35
stressful or traumatic events as an adult (his wife’s infidelity). Indeed, this case is an
example of one of those times when life just whacks you, it knocks you for a loop, due
to an unexpected event that affects you, a loved one, a family member, or a close
friend. And it is difficult to respond to such an event with grace or aplomb.
Nevertheless, Applicant’s response to the situation raises serious questions about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. His grave-digging activity and associated
mock preparations to carry out the murder of his wife’s paramour was far outside the
norm, and it is still too soon to safely discount or dismiss these matters as a security
concern. Based on the evidence as a whole, I have doubts or concerns about
Applicant’s security suitability or fitness. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
10
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
