 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08020 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued  
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 20, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 11, 
2010. The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2010. On August 23, 2010, a Notice 
of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for September 14, 2010. The hearing 
was cancelled on September 14, 2010, because of unforeseen circumstances and 
rescheduled for October 26, 2010. The case was heard on that date. During the 
hearing, the Government offered 11 exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 11. Applicant testified and called two witnesses.  He offered one 
exhibit which was admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record was held open until 
 
2 
 
 
November 9, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely 
submitted a 28-page document that was admitted as AE B with no objection. 
Department Counsel’s response to AE B is marked as HE I. The transcript (Tr) was 
received on November 3, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old mechanical technician employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance. He has worked for his current 
employer since June 2009. He is a high school graduate. He served in the United 
States Navy from 1977 to 1981. He separated with an honorable discharge. He has 
been married and divorced twice. His first divorce occurred in 1993. Two children were 
born of his first marriage, a 21-year-old son and a 22-year-old daughter. He remarried in 
1995. He divorced his second wife in January 2002. (Tr. 6-8, 105-106; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he has the 
following delinquent accounts: a $1,104 credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 10 at 6); a $1,910 medical bill placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 1; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 10 at 8); a $1,013 judgment entered against 
Applicant in 2003 on behalf of a credit card company (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 7; 
Gov 10 at 3); a $308 utility account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 5 at 2; Gov 10 
at 8); a $5,355.95 judgment entered against Applicant in 2002 on behalf of a hospital 
(SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 9; Gov 10 at 3); a $2,816.32 judgment filed against Applicant in 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 8); and a $3,210.35 judgment entered against Applicant in 2002 on 
behalf of a hospital. (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 6)  
 
Applicant previously filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 in December 1998. He 
listed total assets of $7,196 and total liabilities of $33,858. His debts were discharged 
on March 18, 1999. (Gov 11) Applicant testified that he filed for bankruptcy because he 
had a lot of credit card debt. He admits to making a lot of “stupid decisions” back then. 
At the time, his second wife learned she was pregnant and they charged a lot of items 
for the new baby on their credit card accounts. She had a miscarriage. He could not 
afford to pay the credit card bills. (Tr. 94-95) 
 
Applicant was not aware of the delinquent debts until he was interviewed on June 
10, 2009, as part of his background investigation. Three of the debts are medical debts. 
Applicant did not have health insurance. He believes the $5,355 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e was a medical bill for surgery and medical treatment Applicant had after he dropped 
an automobile transmission on his hand. The $3,210 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g related 
to medical treatment his second wife received for breast cancer. The $1,910 medical 
treatment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b related to a surgical procedure Applicant had. Applicant 
was under the false assumption that all of these medical bills were covered by special 
programs for low-income wage earners. (Tr. 60, 97-100, 103, 108-110, Gov 3)  
 
3 
 
 
After learning that he had delinquent debts, Applicant did not immediately take 
steps to resolve the accounts. He did not have the money or the income to begin to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He has received several pay raises with his current 
employer. He tried to resolve these accounts individually, but was unsuccessful. In May 
2010, Applicant entered into a debt recovery program with a debt settlement firm. 
Applicant’s first three or four payments were deposits to the firm. After these payments 
were made, the firm started to make settlement offers to Applicant’s creditors. All of the 
debts alleged in the SOR are included in the debt recovery program. Applicant pays 
$448 a month towards the program. The program is expected to last for 36 months. He 
pays by direct deposit. He has consistently made monthly payments from June to 
October 2010. He made two payments in June, so six payments have been made so 
far. The firm is beginning to send out settlement offers to his creditors included in the 
debt recovery program. (Tr. 62, 78-83; AE B; Gov 2) 
 
When attempting to contact the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, he discovered the 
creditor had gone out of business. His facility security officer (FSO) helped with his 
research and verified that the creditor had gone out of business. (Tr. 42-43, 81-82) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of incurring medical expenses 
without having health insurance, a 2002 divorce, several periods of unemployment, and 
a period of under-employment. From April 2005 to July 2005, he lived with his brother in 
another state and helped him set up a business. His brother paid him room and board. 
He received no other income and did not collect unemployment. In July 2005, at his 
sister’s request, he moved to another state where his elderly mother resided in order to 
help with his mother’s care. He worked for a large retail center and helped care for his 
mother in his spare time until she passed away in 2007. After his mother’s death, he 
moved to his current state of residence because it is where his children lived. From 
August 2008 to April 2009, he worked 35 hours a week as a janitor. He was then hired 
by his current company. (Tr. 63-70) 
 
When Applicant started working for his employer, his annual salary was $29,000. 
His salary has increased to $37,918. He works overtime when possible. His net monthly 
income is $2,200. His son lives with him and pays him $500 a month in rent. His total 
monthly income is $2,700. His total monthly expenses are $1,790. (His grocery bill has 
been reduced by half because his son buys half the groceries.) He has three open 
credit cards that have a total balance of $1,000. He only uses them for emergencies 
and pays $50 towards each credit card account each month, which totals $150 each 
month. He pays $448 towards his debt recovery program. His total monthly payments 
are $2,388. He has $312 left over each month for discretionary spending. (Tr. 70 – 73; 
Gov 2; Gov 3; AE A; AE B) 
 
The Vice President of Human Resources of Applicant’s employer testified on his 
behalf.  She is also the FSO. (She will be referred to as the FSO.) She assisted 
Applicant with his security clearance application.  Applicant was hired as a media clerk. 
He has since progressed to the position of mechanical technician. His salary increased 
when he assumed additional responsibilities. The FSO does not work with Applicant on 
 
4 
 
 
a daily basis. Her interaction with him consists of his hiring, his promotion, and his 
security clearance process. She is aware of the allegations in the SOR as well as 
Applicant’s past financial problems. Applicant has been very proactive when trying to 
clear up his debts. He initially tried to settle accounts on his own. She suggested that he 
look into a debt settlement company. She helped Applicant attempt to locate the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.  They discovered the creditor had gone out of business. She has 
no questions about Applicant’s reliability or judgment. (Tr. 29-43) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified. He has known Applicant for two years. Applicant 
was working for another company. His supervisor admired his work ethic and hired him 
when there was an opening. Applicant is reliable, punctual, and willing to stay until the 
job gets done. His supervisor states that Applicant needs to be more confident, but has 
progressed during the year and half that he has worked for the company. He interacts 
with Applicant about two to three times a week. Applicant has no performance issues. 
He is the “go-to” guy for working off-shifts, weekends, and holidays. He is aware of the 
issues in the SOR because Applicant told him about his financial problems. He also saw 
Applicant attempting to resolve his debts with his creditor over the phone during the 
lunch hour. Applicant works over-time when he has the opportunity to do so. Applicant’s 
supervisor has no concerns about Applicant’s judgment or reliability. (Tr. 44-56)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial difficulties since 1998 when he filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 
7. The SOR alleged seven delinquent accounts totaling $15,716. Of that amount, 
$10,475 consisted of medical bills.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
6 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant has had financial problems for the past 12 years. While Applicant has a debt 
settlement plan in place, and has shown a five-month history of timely payments, his 
debts are not settled yet. It is too soon to conclude that all of the debts will be resolved. 
Applicant’s past financial history, to include a previous bankruptcy in 1998, raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s recent financial 
problems were the result of his 2002 divorce, several medical bills incurred when he 
had no health insurance, and several periods of unemployment or under-employment.  
Of the total amount of debt owed, the majority consists of medical bills. This mitigating 
condition is given less weight because some of Applicant’s periods of unemployment 
were voluntary. He chose to be unemployed when he lived with his brother from April 
2005 to July 2005. He admits that his 1998 bankruptcy was the result of incurring a lot 
of credit card debt. I cannot conclude that Applicant has always acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. It is noted that his recent efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts 
indicate that he is beginning to act responsibly towards his finances.  
  
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies. Applicant has not received financial counseling. However, he has been enrolled 
with the debt settlement company since May 2010. He has made regular payments 
towards the plan. All of his delinquent accounts are included in the plan. There are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved. He has a good job that provides health 
insurance. He is capable of meeting his monthly financial obligations.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He attempted to resolved his delinquent debts on his own but decided 
the best option was to enter into an agreement with a debt settlement company in May 
2010. He has made his monthly payments under the agreement. All of the creditors 
alleged in the SOR are included in the agreement. The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.f was 
included in the agreement, but it was discovered the company is out of business. 
Applicant made an effort to contact the creditor and should not be penalized for the 
 
7 
 
 
creditor going out of business. Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent accounts. Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s record of 
favorable duty performance with his current employer. While Applicant has not always 
made the best financial decisions in the past, I considered that his recent financial 
problems were caused by periods of unemployment and under-employment. I also 
considered that the majority of the delinquent debt balance arose from medical bills 
incurred when Applicant did not have health insurance. Applicant entered into a debt 
settlement agreement in May 2010 and has made consistent payments towards that 
agreement. He initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. Applicant 
understands the security concerns that are raised by his financial situation. He has told 
his supervisor and his FSO about his financial problems. Applicant developed a plan to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He earns enough income to meet the terms of the debt 
settlement plan. He mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
