 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06031 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 3, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 
13, 2010, and reassigned to me on August 4, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
August 16, 2010, as amended on August 19, 2010. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on September 16, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through H, which were received without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents that were 
marked AE I through L and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 24, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the United States military from 1995 until he was honorably discharged in 2004. 
He has an associate’s degree and is a graduate of a specialty school. He was married 
and divorced twice before his current marriage. He has three children, one with each 
wife. He also has two stepchildren.1 
 
 Applicant admitted he was financially irresponsible while he was in the military. 
His finances further suffered after his discharge, when he had periods of 
unemployment. He attended a specialty school and worked full-time for a period. After 
he graduated the specialty school, he accepted a job that did not pay much, but helped 
him gain experience in his profession. Applicant had debts that became delinquent, and 
he fell behind on his child support.2  
 
 Applicant realized he needed to make changes in his life. He accepted the job 
with his current employer in May 2009. His job requires him to travel to Iraq and 
Afghanistan for extended periods. He is paid while he is working overseas, but not while 
he is home. He receives a high salary while he is overseas, which makes up for his lack 
of income while home. He started taking steps to address his delinquent debts after he 
accepted his current job. He was between trips during the hearing. He did not make 
payments on his delinquent debts while he was home. He credibly testified he would 
resume paying his debts when he returned to working overseas.3 
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling about $18,181. Except as 
specifically stated below, the allegations were established through credit reports and 
Applicant’s admissions. The delinquent debts raising security concerns in Applicant’s 
case are addressed in the diagram below.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-21, 26-27, 31, 34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-23, 27-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-25, 30, 44-46. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a Collection 
company/ 
telephone 
company 
$334 Paid May 2010. Tr. at 34-35; 
GE 5; AE E. 
1.b. Medical debt 
 
$830 Plans to pay when returns to work. Tr. at 35-36; 
AE E.  
1.c. Collection 
company/ 
telephone 
company 
$427 Paid May 2010. Tr. at 36-37; 
AE I.  
1.d. Credit card $1,927 
 
Paid $500 April 2010. Plans to pay 
$1,427 balance when returns to 
work.  
Tr. at 37-38; 
AE D, I. 
1.e. Bank $441 Paid. Tr. at 40; GE 
5. 
1.f. Bank $540 Payment plan. Paid $35 August 
2010. Balance of $138. 
Tr. at 38-39; 
GE 5; AE C. 
1.g. Collection 
company/credit 
card 
$2,286 Plans to pay when returns to work. Tr. at 40-41. 
1.h. Child support  $615 Paid arrears. Current. Tr. at 41-42; 
GE 5. 
1.i. Finance 
company/ 
repossessed car 
loan 
$9,767 Plans to pay after smaller debts are 
paid. 
Tr. at 42-44. 
1.j. Collection 
company/utility 
company 
$163 Paid September 2009. Tr. at 46-48; 
GE 4, 5; AE J. 
1.k. Returned 
check 
$791 Paid.  Tr. at 48-49; 
GE 2, 4, 5 
1.l. Collection 
company 
$42 Paid. Tr. at 49-50; 
AE H, K. 
1.m. Collection 
company 
$18 Disputed as paid in 2005. Not on 
three most recent credit reports. 
Tr. at 49; GE 
2, 4, 5; AE H. 
 
 In summary, Applicant paid or settled six debts; he brought his child support 
obligations current; he disputed one account; he made payments on two accounts; and 
he has not made any payments on three debts. Applicant plans to resume paying the 
remaining five debts after he returns to work overseas.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling while he was in the military, but he 
candidly confessed that he was young and did not pay much attention to the classes. 
After he started working at his current job, he received financial advice from his aunt, 
 
4 
 
who is a not an expert but is knowledgeable on financial matters. She recommended 
that he pay his smallest debts first, and then work his way to the larger debts. His 
current financial situation is stable. He manages his large income when he is overseas 
to offset the periods while he is home and not earning a salary.4 
 
 Applicant submitted letters attesting to his outstanding job performance, 
dependability, competence, and dedication.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 52-60. 
 
5 AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was financially irresponsible while he was in the 
military. He had periods of unemployment and underemployment after he left the 
military. In May 2009, Applicant accepted a job that pays very well while he is overseas. 
He does not receive a salary while he is home between trips. Applicant listened to his 
aunt about addressing his finances. He has made great strides in resolving his debts. 
He paid a number of debts and plans to resume paying his remaining debts after he 
returns overseas. In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the 
Appeal Board discussed an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and [has] taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can 
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually 
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the 
SOR. 
 
I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a good-faith 
effort to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. I further find clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are 
 
7 
 
applicable. Applicant does not rate full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) because 
some of his financial problems were caused by his irresponsibility and he still has 
several debts to address. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the $18 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. He credibly 
testified that he paid the debt. The debt is not listed on the three most recent credit 
reports in evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to that debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. military. Applicant readily 
admits that he was irresponsible about his finances for years. He decided he needed to 
make changes in his life and accepted a job that requires him to travel to Iraq and 
Afghanistan for extended periods. He is paid very well while he is overseas, but nothing 
while he is home between trips. Since he accepted that position, he has paid a number 
of debts and has plans to pay his remaining debts. As indicated above, an applicant is 
not required to establish that he has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. I find that 
Applicant has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. His finances do not constitute a security 
concern. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
