 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05536 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 2, 2007. On June 3, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 8, 2010, and answered it on June 25, 2010. 
He did not state whether he requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On 
 
2 
 
 
June 30, 2010, he telephonically requested a hearing. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.) 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 29, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on August 23, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 2, 
2010, scheduling it for September 20, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2010. 
 
I kept the record open until October 8, 2010, to enable Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. On October 5, 2010, I granted his request to extend 
the deadline for submission of additional evidence until October 15, 1010. (HX II.) He 
timely submitted AX B through D. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX B 
through D are attached to the record as HX III. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the all allegations in the SOR and 
explained that he was making payments on all the debts alleged in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old quality assurance inspector employed by a defense 
contractor providing communications services for the U.S. Navy. He has worked for his 
current employer since September 2006. He served on active duty in the Navy from 
March 1992 to February 2006 and received an honorable discharge. He received a 
security clearance while in the Navy. (GX 1 at 31.) He was a first class petty officer 
when he was discharged. (GX 6; Tr. 34.) He was unemployed after his discharge until 
he began working at his current job. (Tr. 42.)  
 
 Applicant married in August 1994, separated in February 2006, and divorced in 
December 2008. No children were born during the marriage. He remarried in May 2010. 
(GX 3 at 9-11; Tr. 31.) His current wife is a retired Navy chief petty officer. They live in a 
house she owns and they drive her car. (Tr. 51-52.) In addition to her retired pay, his 
wife also earns about $45,000 per year from her post-retirement job. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 In July 2005, Applicant was charged with aggravated sexual battery and indecent 
liberties with a child by a custodian. The charges alleged that he took liberties with a 
child whom he was baby-sitting. Applicant denied the charges. He was tried in February 
2006, pleaded not guilty, but was convicted. His conviction was overturned on appeal. 
Upon retrial in October 2008, he was acquitted of all charges. (AX C.) The record does 
not reflect what evidence was presented at his two trials. 
 
Applicant testified at the hearing that his initial conviction was overturned based 
on evidence that was not presented at the trial. (Tr. 29.) No further evidence concerning 
the basis for the appellate court’s decision was submitted by either party. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant left the Navy at the end of his enlistment while pending trial. He 
testified that he decided not to reenlist to protect his honorable discharge, fearing that a 
criminal conviction would result in an other than honorable discharge. (Tr. 25, 56.) 
 
 Applicant spent about $40,000 in legal fees to defend himself against the 
charges. As a result of these legal fees, as well as about $1,200 in legal fees for his 
divorce, Applicant experienced financial problems. (AX B, E, and F; Tr. 28-30, 33.) The 
SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling about $24,770. All four debts were incurred 
to pay his legal expenses. (Tr. 38-50.) 
 
 Starting in October 2009, Applicant began making payments on the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d. He is making monthly payments of $200 directly to the creditor on 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, and he is making monthly payments totaling $356 on the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d through a debt management company. (GX 3 at 3, 8; Tr. 43-44, 
48.) He testified he has received financial counseling from the debt management 
company. (Tr. 50.) In July 2010, he paid in full the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) in October 2009 
reflecting net monthly income of $2,517, expenses of $1,800, debt payments of $505, 
and a remainder of $212. The PFS was submitted before he remarried, and it does not 
reflect his wife’s income. It includes the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, but does 
not include the management fees paid to the debt management company. (GX 3 at 7.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
 
5 
 
 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous and ongoing, but they occurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur, i.e., substantial legal expenses defending a criminal 
charge. Applicant’s acquittal and his responsible efforts to repay the debts for legal 
expenses have dispelled any reasonable doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s period of 
unemployment after leaving the Navy was not beyond his control, because he 
voluntarily chose to terminate his Navy career in order to avoid the risk of an other than 
honorable discharge. Nevertheless, this mitigating condition is established because 
Applicant’s criminal prosecution and the break-up of his marriage were circumstances 
beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
testified that he received counseling from his debt management company, but his 
testimony is not corroborated by documentary evidence. Nevertheless, the second 
prong of this mitigating condition is established because his financial problems are 
being resolved. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case 
No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that 
an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. Id. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant incurred legal expenses of more than $40,000 for his criminal trial and 
his divorce. As of the date of the SOR, his delinquent debts had been reduced to about 
$24,770, and he has further reduced his indebtedness since receiving the SOR. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy for 14 years and held a security 
clearance for all his Navy service. He was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. 
He has remarried, established a sound plan to resolve his indebtedness, and put his life 
back together.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
