 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.09-00984 
  ) 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alexander S. Michalakos, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On April 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C 
(Foreign Preference), Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 3, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to another administrative 
judge on July 28, 2010, and reassigned it to me on August 2, 2010. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on August 5, 2010, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2010. On 
that date, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 3, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
Iraq are included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and contains attachments I 
through V (Tr. 14-15). Applicant did not object to my consideration of those Hearing 
Exhibits. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge 
pertinent to Iraq, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c. He denied the allegations contained in ¶ 3.a.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was born in Iraq and attended high school there. He 
served in the Iraqi navy from 1984 to 1986.  In 1990, he left Iraq as a refugee to escape 
Saddam Hussein’s regime. He spent the next two years in a refugee camp in Saudi 
Arabia. In December 1992, he came to the United States. He studied English and took 
computer classes at a junior college. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 
2001. 
 
 In April 2003, Applicant married his wife, who was born in the Ukraine and was in 
the United States on a student visa. She subsequently became a U.S. citizen. They do 
not have children. They recently divorced although they still live together. He did not 
want the divorce.  
 
 After arriving in the United States in December 1992, Applicant held various 
positions. He worked as an assistant manager for a restaurant and more recently, was a 
manager for a large furniture store. In 2003, he applied for a linguist position with a 
defense contractor. He completed a security clearance application (SF 86) in October 
2003. (GE 1.) He was not hired at that time. (Tr. 57.) 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born in Iraq. They are in their-mid sixties, and 
are citizens and residents of Iraq. His father is a retired farmer. His mother is a 
 
 
 
 
3
homemaker. His father was arrested and tortured by Saddam Hussein’s government in 
1991. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant has five brothers and one sister, all of whom were born in Iraq and 
reside there. One brother worked as a linguist for the U.S. Armed Forces for a period of 
time. He is a teacher. One brother worked as a cook for a U.S. military base. One 
brother worked in construction at a U.S. military base, but now owns a grocery store. 
One brother is a farmer. One brother is blind and unemployed. His sister is a housewife. 
All of his siblings are married, except one brother who lives with his parents. None of 
those family members has been targeted by terrorists in Iraq. (Tr. 66.) Applicant speaks 
to his parents about once a month and his five siblings every couple months. He speaks 
to the brother who worked as a translator once a month. (Tr. 99.) He had a stepbrother 
who was arrested and tortured in 1991. He is dead. (GE 3.) 
 
 In November 2006, Applicant went to Iraq to visit his mother who was very sick. 
He had not returned to the country since leaving it in 1990 and had not seen his family 
since then. He used his U.S. passport to enter Kuwait. His brother met him at the 
Kuwaiti/Iraqi border and used family documents to gain admission for Applicant into 
Iraq. His brother was concerned that if Applicant were identified as an American, he 
would be in danger.  Within the next day or so, Applicant’s brother helped him obtain an 
Iraqi passport in his birth name. While there, he stayed at his parents’ home. (Tr. 61.) 
When Applicant left three weeks later in December 2006, he gave the Iraqi passport to 
his brother after he exited the Iraqi border and entered Kuwait. (Tr. 39.) He did not bring 
it with him to the United States because he did not want it and is “proud to be an 
American.” (Tr. 39.) 
 
 On March 28, 2008, Applicant re-applied for a linguist position with the same 
defense contractor and completed another security clearance application (e-QIP). In 
response to Section 17(d): “In the last 7 years, have you had an active passport that 
was issued by a foreign government,” he did not disclose his Iraqi passport. Applicant 
denied that he intentionally failed to do so, and admitted that he made a mistake. (Tr. 
42.) He explained that after discussing the content of the e-QIP with his employer, they 
sent him the completed 33-page form, which he did not carefully review before signing 
it. (Tr. 43.) During an interview with a government investigator in October 2008, he 
explained in detail how he obtained the Iraqi passport, but did not know whether it had 
expired. He was willing to “renounce” the passport and his Iraqi citizenship.  (GE 3 at 5.)  
 
 In December 2008, Applicant was hired by a defense contractor and returned to 
Iraq to translate for the U.S. forces. While working in Iraq, he had telephonic contact 
with his (interpreter) brother, who knew he was in the country. He did not have contact 
with other family members because he was not permitted to do so. They did not know 
he was in the country. (Tr. 61-62.) He does not have any plans to visit his family in Iraq, 
but would like his parents to come to the United States. (Tr. 79.) His brother, who 
worked as an interpreter, may also immigrate here. (Tr. 63.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 On August 16, 2009, Applicant was seriously injured in an explosion while on a 
military mission. He was transported from Iraq to another country and then to the United 
States. He was in a comatose state for approximately 40 days. (Tr. 91.) He has been in 
physical rehabilitation for almost a year. He thinks his physician will authorize him to 
return to work soon. He wants to resume his translating duties with the U.S. troops. (Tr. 
92.) He said, “I want to continue and I want to do my best to support this country.” (Tr. 
53.)  
 
 Applicant’s Iraqi passport remained with his brother until January 2010, when 
one of Applicant’s friends, visiting Iraq, brought the passport to him in the United States. 
On April 22, 2010, Applicant’s facility security officer destroyed the passport, which was 
scheduled to expire on November 1, 2010. (AE L.)  
 
 Applicant does not own any property in Iraq. He owned a home in the United 
States, but relinquished ownership to his wife as part of their divorce agreement. He 
does not have a retirement account, but does have a savings account here. (Tr. 92-93.) 
He stated that he has not received any type of benefits or privileges from Iraq. (Id.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a Certificate of Appreciation for his superior performance 
from March 2009 to August 2009 as an interpreter with the Armed Forces and four 
letters of recommendation. A sergeant who worked with Applicant wrote: 
 
In the course of his duties, [Applicant] was called upon to visit remote and 
often hostile locations in order to converse with the local populace. This 
task required a high degree of competence and ability to adapt to evolving 
situations; of which I am able to say that [Applicant] was able to effectively 
provide through the performance of his duties. (AE C.)   
 
Another sergeant with whom Applicant worked from March 2009 to June 2009 
stated: 
 
[Applicant] served as my personal interpreter during numerous meeting 
local Iraqi civil, tribal, and military leaders. During every engagement he 
accurately conveyed not only the words that were spoken but conveyed 
the tone and emotion of both parties.  [Applicant’s] understanding of the 
nuances of the Arabic language and Iraqi culture proved an invaluable tool 
in building rapport with and influencing these leaders. 
 
[Applicant] is among the most competent interpreters I have had the 
opportunity to work with in my four years of conducting military operations. 
(AE E.) 
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted pride in his U.S. citizenship. He is very 
dedicated and enthusiastic about his ability to serve as a linguist for the U.S. military. 
He testified that “I love this country. I came here. They gave me my life and I’m proud to 
 
 
 
 
5
be an American citizen and I’ll love this country till the last day of my life. And I will do 
anything to support this country.” (Tr. 104.) 
 
Iraq 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE I, V.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
 
 
6
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern related to foreign preference: 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 Under AG ¶ 10, two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case are: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
When Applicant renewed his Iraqi passport in November 2006 after becoming a 
U.S. citizen in December 2001, he met the conditions in AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(b).  
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating 
condition. AG ¶ 11 lists three conditions that may mitigate those security concerns:  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
 
 
 
7
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and  
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant expressed his willingness to renounce his Iraqi citizenship and strong 
loyalty to the United States. Applicant’s security office destroyed the Iraqi passport in 
April 2010.  The evidence supports the application of the referenced mitigating 
conditions. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or Government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern, two of 
which may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant has contact and connections with his parents, brothers and sister, who 
are residents and citizens of Iraq. He acknowledged that these relationships potentially 
create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists 
in Iraq are hostile to the U.S. interests and citizens. Applicant’s relationship with his 
family members could also create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and [his] desire to help” his 
family living in Iraq. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions.  
  
  Three Foreign Influence mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to the disqualifying conditions based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
In the event terrorists would learn of Applicant’s identity and presence in Iraq, his 
family members could be placed in positions that would force him to choose between 
them and U.S. interests. However, the possibility of that conflict occurring is diminished 
by two factors: Applicant has limited communication with his family members; and other 
than one brother, none of the family members knew of his work in Iraq because 
Applicant did not disclose it in conformance with employment regulations.  Hence, AG ¶ 
8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. He has lived in the United States since 1992. He attended 
school here. He became a U.S. citizen in 2001. He worked at various jobs for 15 years 
before obtaining his current position. Prior to his recent divorce, he owned a home in the 
United States. He has bank accounts here. He does not have any financial interests in 
Iraq. He currently resides with his former wife, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen. There is 
no evidence that he has connections or contact with people living in Iraq other than his 
immediate family members. He expressed a strong sense of loyalty to the United States 
 
 
 
 
9
and zeal for his job. His supervisors, who have worked in close contact with him in a 
combat zone, consider him to be an ethical and dedicated man, and a valuable asset to 
the U.S. War on Terror. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has some application to the security concerns raised, as Applicant’s 
contacts with his five siblings are generally infrequent and casual. He telephones them 
every two or three months. However, he speaks to his parents and one brother every 
month. Since leaving Iraq in 1990 as a refugee, he returned to see his family only once, 
in 2006.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set 
out in AG & 15:       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
One Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition is particularly relevant and 
potentially disqualifying in this case. Guideline ¶ 16(a) provides that the “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities” may raise a security concern. Applicant incorrectly answered one 
question on the March 2008 e-QIP. He denied that he intentionally falsified his answer 
or attempted to deceive the Government.  
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the Government has the 
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in 
ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004). 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleged that Applicant falsified the March 2008 e-QIP because he did 
not disclose that he had obtained an Iraqi passport in November 2006. Applicant 
admitted the omission, but asserted that he made a mistake by not carefully reviewing 
the 33-page e-QIP after his employer prepared it for his signature. After listening to his 
testimony, reviewing the detailed information he revealed during an October 2008 
interview regarding that passport, and considering the fact that he left the Iraqi passport 
 
 
 
 
10
with his brother in December 2006, Applicant’s explanation is credible. His omission 
may have been negligent, but does not rise to a level of intentional wrongdoing in an 
effort to deceive the Government. Nor does that omission raise questions about his 
reliability or ability to protect classified information. The evidence does not establish 
deliberate falsification. Accordingly, Guideline E is found in his favor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis. First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists in Iraq 
are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and 
even friendly governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s family members to obtain 
such information. Second, he had numerous connections to Iraq before he left Iraq as a 
refugee in 1990. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there. He attended 
high school there and served in the Iraqi navy for two years. Third, his parents and six 
siblings remain residents and citizens of Iraq. Fourth, he maintains some contact with 
these family members and obtained an Iraqi passport in 2006, in order to visit his sick 
mother and avoid disclosing his U.S. citizenship and jeopardize his safety. 
 
 Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 17 years, and 
 
 
 
 
11
has been a naturalized citizen since 2001. His former spouse (with whom he still 
resides) has been living in the United States since 2003 and is a naturalized citizen. He 
owned property here and has a bank account. After leaving Iraq in 1990, he did not 
return until November 2006, when he visited his sick mother. The next time he returned 
was in December 2008 as a translator. His ties to the United States are stronger than 
his ties to family members living in Iraq. There is no evidence that he has ever taken 
any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to 
the United States seriously. In his employment with a defense contractor, he provided 
vital and direct support to the U.S. Armed Forces from December 2008 until August 
2009.  He worked diligently and courageously in an important capacity, which resulted 
in a serious physical injury. His supervisors assessed him as loyal, trustworthy, 
conscientious, and responsible. They praised his dedication and capabilities. While 
working in Iraq, he did not have any physical contact with his family. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record.  
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his work with the U.S. Armed 
Forces without any indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While 
that fact is not normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal 
Board noted in ISCR Case No. 05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006) as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s 
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns, and that the 
record does not contain sufficient evidence to raise a personal conduct security 
concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a (1) through 1.a.(3):   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
