 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03742
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On February 19, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information. On
March 15, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.2
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
2
facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed in the  adjudicative guidelines
(AG)  for criminal conduct (Guideline J) and personal conduct (Guideline E).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on June 21, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on June 24,
2010, I convened a hearing in this matter on July 13, 2010. The parties appeared as
scheduled. The Government presented eight exhibits (Gx. 1 - 8), which were admitted
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of
hearing (Tr.) on July 27, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the Government alleged that in March 2005, Applicant was
charged with trespassing (SOR 1.a); that in June 2007, he was arrested and charged
with contempt of court for non-support, for which he was fined and ordered to pay a
$548 arrearage as a condition of his release from jail (SOR 1.b); that in February 2008,
he was arrested and charged with the felony offenses of motor vehicle theft and all
other larceny, and that in March 2009, he was convicted of felony grand larceny of a
vehicle >$1,000 and <$5,000, for which he was sentenced to 18 months in jail
(suspended) and placed on five years probation (SOR 1.c); and that he violated Title 18
U.S.C. 1001 by deliberately making false statements to the Government, as alleged in
SOR 2.c - 2.d (SOR 1.d).
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that in August 2006, Applicant was
terminated from his job for venturing out of his assigned work area (SOR 2.a); that in
February 2008, he deliberately failed to report his February 2008 arrest for felony car
theft, because he was concerned that he would be fired from his job if he disclosed his
arrest (SOR 2.b); that he deliberately falsified his February 2009 e-QIP by answering
“no” to question 23.a (felony arrests) and failing to list his February 2008 arrest for
felony car theft (SOR 2.c); that he deliberately falsified his February 2009 e-QIP by
answering “no” to question 23.b (pending charges) and failing to list his February 2008
arrest for felony car theft (SOR 2.d); and that he deliberately falsified his February 2009
e-QIP by answering “no” to question 23.d (other arrests last 7 years) and failing to list
his February 2008 arrest for felony car theft or his 2005 arrest for trespassing and his
2007 arrest for contempt (SOR 2.e).
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He also provided a one-page
notarized statement with his answer. That statement provided argument for mitigation,
but also made clear that he denied intentionally making false statements as alleged in
SOR 2.c - 2.e. Accordingly, I entered denials on his behalf as to SOR 2.c - 2.e. (Tr. 10 -
11) Having reviewed Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I
make the following findings of relevant fact.
3
Applicant is 22 years old and has worked since December 2008 as a stock clerk
for a defense contractor. He requires a security clearance to perform his duties.
Applicant is not married, but he has two children, ages 2 and 4, by two different women.
Applicant lives with and supports his younger child and her mother. In November 2006,
he was ordered to pay $253 each month as support for his other child. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2) In
June 2007, Applicant was arrested and jailed for failing to pay the court-ordered child
support. He was released after satisfying a two-month arrearage and paying court
costs. In May 2007, a bench warrant for his arrest was issued for the same offense
(contempt of court) when he accrued an arrearage of about $754. Applicant’s pay is
currently being garnished to satisfy his ongoing child support obligations and an
arrearage of about $554 as of September 2009. (Gx. 5; Tr. 76)
In March 2005, when he was still in high school, Applicant was arrested and
charged with trespassing. A homeowner called the police when he saw Applicant and a
friend in the yards of two nearby houses where neither of the youths lived. Applicant’s
friend explained to the police that they were trying to find a shortcut back to school.
Applicant had no explanation at the time. (Gx. 4) When Applicant was interviewed by a
Government investigator in April 2009, he stated that he was not trespassing and that
his friend was going to the bathroom next to someone’s house. (Gx. 2)
In May 2008, a grand jury indicted Applicant for grand larceny of a vehicle worth
more than $1,000 and less than $5,000, a felony in the state where the offenses
occurred. In October 2007, Applicant’s cousin had stolen a car, which Applicant has
since claimed belonged to his cousin in the first place. There is no information to
corroborate this claim. Applicant was initially arrested for this offense in February 2008.
In March 2009, Applicant pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 18 months in jail, which
was suspended. He also was placed on probation for five years. A condition of his
probation was that he pay restitution of about $3,500. Applicant testified that he has
paid about half, but acknowledged that he will remain on probation until he has paid the
full amount. (Gx. 2; Gx. 6; Tr. 59 - 64, 73 - 74) 
Applicant has not yet told his supervisors at his current job that he was arrested
for grand larceny, because he is concerned that he will lose his job if they find out. (Gx.
2; Gx. 3; Tr. 83 - 84) He also did not disclose his arrest in his e-QIP, because he was
concerned about not being able to get a clearance or keep his job. (Gx. 2; Tr. 46 - 48)
In August 2006, Applicant was working as a painter for a non-defense contractor
company. While on his way to a job assignment with co-workers, he stopped at his
house to retrieve his driver’s license for identification needed to access the job site.
While at his house, one of his co-workers spilled paint along the curb. A neighbor asked
them to clean it up, but they left instead. Applicant and his co-workers were
subsequently fired for their conduct. Applicant also lied to his boss about details of this
incident. (Gx. 3; Gx. 7)
At the time Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he had not yet appeared in court to
answer the grand larceny charge for which he was arrested in February 2008. However,
he failed to disclose that pending charge as required by e-QIP question 23.c. He also
did not disclose his grand larceny arrest or his contempt of court and trespassing
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
 Directive. 6.3.4
4
charges, as required by e-QIP question 23.f (other arrests in the preceding seven
years).
Applicant was interviewed by Government investigators twice during his
background investigation. In an April 6, 2009, interview, he discussed his 2007 arrest for
contempt of court due to a child support arrearage. He denied having any other arrests;
however, the interviewer confronted him with the record of his February 2008 grand
larceny arrest. (Gx. 2) In his second interview, on September 10, 2009, Applicant
admitted intentionally trying to conceal the grand larceny arrest during his first interview.
He further explained that, because the security process is slow, he thought he would
have been able to pay the court-ordered restitution and have his record expunged
before that interview. (Gx. 3)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to3
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies4
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 30
(Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
5
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who5
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.6
Analysis
Criminal Conduct
All of the information presented, including Applicant’s admissions, raises a
security concern that is expressed at AG ¶ 30 as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The Government presented sufficient reliable information to support the SOR
allegations that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct three times between 2005 and
2008. Available information also shows that Applicant is still on probation for a felony
conviction based on his February 2008 guilty plea. Finally, as discussed more fully
under Guideline E, below, Applicant deliberately falsified answers to e-QIP questions
about his criminal conduct. Intentionally providing such false statements to an agency of
the United States Government concerning matters within its jurisdiction is a violation of
18 U.S.C. § 1001, a felony. Accordingly, the record requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses); AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted); and AG ¶
31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation).
I have also considered the potential applicability of the mitigating conditions listed
under AG ¶ 32. Applicant did not present any information that supports application of
any of those factors. Applicant failed to establish that he did not commit any of the
offenses listed, or that he was somehow pressured into committing any of the offenses.
He is still on probation for a felony offense that occurred less than three years ago, and
any claim of rehabilitation is wholly undermined by his deliberate falsifications
(discussed more fully under Guideline E) about his criminal record. Applicant has not
6
mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s information about his
criminal conduct.
Personal Conduct 
All of the information presented, including Applicant’s testimony, raises a security
concern about his personal conduct that is expressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The Government presented sufficient reliable information that shows Applicant
deliberately withheld relevant and material information about his criminal conduct from
his e-QIP because he was afraid he would lose his job. He also admitted that he has not
disclosed to his current employer his 2008 felony arrest for the same reason. Available
information also shows that when Applicant was fired from an earlier job in 2006, he lied
to his boss about his involvement in the incident that led to his firing. Finally, although
not alleged in the SOR, Applicant lied to a Government investigator about his arrest
record during a subject interview in April 2009, when after discussing his arrest for
contempt of court, he denied any other arrests. All of the foregoing requires application
of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) and AG ¶ 16b) (deliberately
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government
representative).
In response to the Government’s information, Applicant did not provide any
information that supports application of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 17. AG ¶
17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not apply
because Applicant had to be confronted with his falsifications in his first subject
interview before discussing the events at issue. There is also no record of Applicant
trying to resolve the inaccuracies in his e-QIP. 
AG ¶ 17(b) (the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning
the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully) does
not apply because Applicant did not claim or establish that anyone told him it would be
appropriate to withhold information about his arrests when he submitted his e-QIP or
 See footnote 4, supra.7
7
when he spoke with Government investigators. He also has not provided an appropriate
reason for not disclosing his grand larceny arrest to his employer, who is required as a
contractual partner with the DoD to help ensure the suitability of its employees for
access to classified information. Likewise, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(e) (the
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress) does not apply because Applicant has continued to withhold
adverse information from his employer because he fears that he will lose his job or will
suffer some other adverse consequence.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply because Applicant’s
willingness to lie to the Government about important information in his background is a
fundamental breach of the fiduciary relationship Applicant seeks to have with the
Government. His felonious conduct in trying to conceal his arrests cannot be
characterized as minor, and it must be considered recent as it is part of his current
request for a clearance.
The mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy,
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) and
AG ¶ 17(f) (association with persons involved in criminal activities has ceased or occurs
under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations) are
inapposite to the facts and circumstances of this case.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and J. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 22 years
old, and he has worked for his current employer for almost two years. He has also been
employed in one job or another since 2005. Normally, it would be reasonable to
presume that a gainfully-employed 22 year old is also a mature, responsible adult. That
is not the case here. Applicant’s conduct since high school is best characterized by his
involvement in criminal activity, an inability or unwillingness to adhere to court orders
about his child support obligations, and an apparent willingness to lie to protect his own
interests. He presented nothing to indicate that his conduct has changed or that it will
not recur. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information bearing on7
Applicant’s past conduct and current circumstances shows he has failed to address
satisfactorily the Government’s doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the
Government’s interests as his own. Because protection of the national interest is
 See footnote 6, supra. 8
8
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government.  8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
