 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07551 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire (SF 86) on June 12, 
2009. On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 12, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 21, 2010. 
The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2010. On August 9, 2010, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for September 9, 2010. Appellant failed to appear at 
the hearing. She claimed that she had not received proper notice. There being no 
evidence that she received adequate notice, the hearing was rescheduled. On 
September 15, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
September 30, 2010. On that date, the hearing was convened. However, Applicant did 
 
2 
 
 
not receive the Government’s exhibits due to a mistake by the courier service. Applicant 
was granted a two-week extension in order to allow her the opportunity to prepare for 
the hearing. On September 30, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the 
hearing for October 14, 2010. The hearing was held on that date.  
 
 During the hearing, the Government offered nine exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 9. The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e was withdrawn by the 
Government. Applicant testified and offered six exhibits which were admitted as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – F. After the hearing, the record was held open until October 
28, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted 
a 15-page document that was admitted as AE G. Department Counsel’s response to AE 
G is marked as HE II. The transcript (Tr) was received on October 20, 2010.  Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Reciprocity Issue 
 
 Applicant testified at hearing that another government agency had granted her a 
security clearance in a previous job. The issue of reciprocity was raised. (Tr. 32-34; AE 
C; AE D) DoD 5220.22-M, section 2-204 states: 
 
Federal agencies that grant access to classified information to their 
employees or their contractor employees are responsible for determining 
whether such employees have been previously cleared or investigated by 
the Federal Government. Any previously granted PCL that is based upon 
a current investigation of a scope that meets or exceeds that necessary 
for the clearance required shall provide the basis for issuance of a new 
clearance without further investigation or adjudication unless significant 
derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated becomes 
known to the granting agency.  
 
 Department Counsel contended that reciprocity did not apply because the 
government agency granted Applicant a security clearance based on the Department of 
Defense’s grant of an interim security clearance. Reciprocity did not apply because the 
other agency did not do a complete investigation and adjudication. In other words, they 
granted Applicant a security clearance based on the Department of Defense’s 
incomplete investigation. Department Counsel presented documents to support their 
position. Upon review of all the documents, I concluded reciprocity did not apply to 
Applicant’s case because the other government agency’s grant of a security clearance 
was based on an incomplete DoD investigation. (Tr. 32-45; AE 10)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶1.c, 1.g, 
1.h, and 1.n. She denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d-1.f, 1.i -1.m, and 1.o. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old computer system administrator employed by a 
Department of Defense contractor applying for a security clearance. She has worked for 
her current employer since April 19, 2010. She is a high school graduate and is close to 
completing her four-year college degree. She is single and has no children. (Tr at 6-8; 
Gov 1.)  
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that she has 
had financial problems in the past. The SOR alleged 14 debts, an approximate total 
balance of $35,710. The largest debt was a $17,061 automobile repossession. (SOR ¶ 
1.c) Seven of the debts were medical bills totaling $2,979. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f – 1.j) 
Two debts were consumer debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.o) Three of the alleged debts involved 
judgments for nonpayment of rent. (SOR ¶¶ 1.k -1.m) Another debt alleged a $475 
judgment entered against Applicant in April 2006 which was satisfied by wage 
garnishment. (SOR ¶ 1.n)  
 
Applicant incurred a lot of these debts when she was a college student. She also 
endured several periods of unemployment. During the hearing, she testified that she 
was laid off in 2004 and was unemployed for one year. In 2006, she was laid off again 
and was unemployed for around five months. (Tr. 59-60; 116) Her security clearance 
application lists periods of unemployment from November 2007 to June 2008; October 
2004 to December 2004; and December 2001 to February 2002. (Gov 1, section 13A) 
The medical bills were incurred when she had health issues but did not have health 
insurance. (Tr. 109; Gov 2 at 3)  
 
The current status of the delinquent debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a, $71 pet store account placed for collection: Paid on October 22, 
2010. Applicant initially denied the debt because she was unaware of it. (AE G at 2; Gov 
3 at 1; Gov 4 at 4)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $25 medical account, creditor unknown: Applicant testified that she 
does not know what this account is. No specific creditor was alleged. I find for Applicant 
based on the lack of specificity in the pleading. (Tr. 47; Gov 3 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶1.c, $17,061 automobile repossession, repossessed in 2006: Applicant 
testified that she was unable to make her car payments because she lost her job. She 
initially believed it was removed from her credit report. She provided page one of a two-
page statement from Experian dated September 1, 2009, indicating that the account 
was paid and closed. A credit report dated January 1, 2010, indicates the collection 
agency who is listed as the creditor in the SOR allegation purchased the debt in 
September 2009. Applicant believed that the debt was resolved because she was able 
to purchase a new automobile in 2008 from the same automobile manufacturer. 
Applicant called the collection agency. The collection agency offered to settle the 
account for a $3,500 lump-sum payment. Applicant does not have the $3,500 but is 
 
4 
 
 
saving money to be able to settle this debt. She has saved about $1,500. She did not 
get anything in writing from the collection agency pertaining to the settlement offer. (Tr. 
48-50, 64-67; Gov 2 at 34. AE G) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h medical collection accounts in the respective 
amounts of $110, $940, $279, and $178: Applicant states that the medical accounts are 
being collected by the same collection agency. She is making payments towards all of 
the accounts. She claims to have been paying $100 a month towards these accounts. 
She provided a statement from the collection agency dated October 9, 2009, indicating 
a balance of $457.47. The receipt is over a year old. It appears that Applicant did not 
make another payment until October 22, 2010, when she paid $100. (see AE G at 3) 
(Tr. 29, 50-51, 100; AE A; Gov 2 at 38-39; Gov 4 at 5-6) These accounts are not listed 
on a January 14, 2010, credit report which is the most recent credit report in the file. 
(Gov 3) During her subject interview on August 19, 2009, Applicant stated that the debts 
were covered under her mother’s health insurance. (Gov 2 at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, $98 medical collection account: The account was paid on October 22, 
2010. (Tr.  52; AE G at 3; Gov 4 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, $1,349 medical collection account: In September 2009, Applicant 
formally disputed this account with one of the credit reporting agencies. The account 
was deleted from her credit report on September 30, 2009. The debt is resolved. (Tr. 
53, 95; Gov 2 at 36-38; Gov 4 at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k, $10,467 judgment entered against Applicant on behalf of an 
apartment complex on March 24, 2004. Applicant admits that she occasionally got 
behind in her rent when she lived at the apartment complex but claims she always paid 
the rent. She claims she no longer owes the apartment complex money. She paid the 
past-due rent to her property manager. The property manager passed away and the 
company claimed that she owed over $10,000. She claims she disputed the debts with 
the credit reporting agencies and it was removed from her credit reports. The database 
of the court where the judgment was entered listed this judgment as being a judgment 
by admission. It is not listed as satisfied. (Tr. 53-56; Gov 5 at 5-7)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.l, SOR alleges five lawsuits against Applicant on behalf of the same 
apartment complex alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, above, for unpaid rent which were filed on 
October 19, 2001; October 23, 2000; January 31, 2002; March 30, 2001; and June 25, 
2002. The court paperwork indicated that four of the cases were satisfied before 
judgment. The October 19, 2001 filing was satisfied before judgment on November 27, 
2001. (see Gov 6 at 3) The October 23, 2000 filing was satisfied before judgment on 
December 5, 2000. (see Gov 6 at 6) The January 31, 2002 filing was satisfied before 
judgment on February 26, 2002. (see Gov 6 at 9) The March 30, 2001 filing was 
satisfied before judgment on April 30, 2001. (see Gov 6 at 12) The June 25, 2002 filing 
indicates a non-suit on July 25, 2002. (Tr. 88-89; Gov 5 at 5-7; Gov 6 at 15)  
 
 
5 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m, the SOR alleges five lawsuits against Applicant on behalf of an 
apartment complex for unpaid rent which were filed on January 26, 2005; October 17, 
2005; August 31, 2006; and April 12, 2007. The filing on January 26, 2005 was 
withdrawn on March 2005. (see Gov 7 at 2) The October 17, 2005 filing resulted in a 
judgment awarded on November 16, 2005. The debt was satisfied on November 2, 
2006 before the judgment was entered. (see Gov 7 at 4) The August 31, 2006 filing 
resulted in a default judgment on September 25, 2006. The judgment was satisfied on 
November 2, 2006. (see Gov 7 at 6) The April 12, 2007 filing resulted in a default 
judgment on May 9, 2007. The judgment was satisfied on June 11, 2007. (see Gov 7 at 
8-9) Applicant had difficulty paying rent because her roommate moved out. She had to 
eventually move in with her parents. (Tr. 57-58, 89) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n, the case was filed for a $475 debt on February 13, 2006. On April 13, 
2006, a default judgment was entered against Applicant. Applicant’s wages were 
garnished on June 2, 2006. The judgment was satisfied through wage garnishment on 
August 17, 2006. The debt is resolved. (Tr. 58, 91-92; Gov 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o, two creditors attempted to obtain judgments against Applicant for an 
unknown amount. Both suits were withdrawn because they were unable to serve 
Applicant. Applicant denies these debts. The debts are not listed on her credit report. I 
find for Applicant with respect to this allegation. (Gov 9; Answer to SOR)  
 
Applicant has not attended financial counseling. In January 2010, she looked into 
entering a debt consolidation plan with a credit union but did not mention a plan during 
the hearing. She currently supports her sister, a recent college graduate, who is 
searching for employment. She puts money aside for savings and to save for resolving 
debts. (Tr. 98-99; AE 2 at 16-18) She is up-to-date on her recent bills. (Tr. 105)   
 
In her post-hearing submission dated October 25, 2010, Applicant provided an 
updated personal financial statement. Her net monthly income is approximately 
$3,922.77. Her rent is $1,500. Groceries are $240. Clothing is about $100 a month. Her 
utilities are $400. Her car payment is $588. Her car insurance is $144. She pays $50 a 
month in medical expenses, and $200 a month for entertainment. Her total monthly 
expenses are $3,222. She pays $100 a month towards the medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. She pays $50 to $100 a month towards student loans. 
Most of her student loans are on deferment. Her total monthly payments are $3,422. 
After expenses, she has approximately $500.77 left over for discretionary spending.  
She has about $1,800 in savings which she hopes to apply to the automobile 
repossession debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Tr. 106-107; AE G at 4)  
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed her security clearance questionnaire on June 12, 
2009, she omitted several items in response to questions about her financial record 
which are listed in section 26 of the security clearance questionnaire.  The Government 
alleges that her omissions were intentional.  The preface of section 26 states: “For the 
 
6 
 
 
following, answer for the last 7 years, unless otherwise specified in the question. 
Disclose all financial obligations, including those for which you are a cosigner or a 
guarantor.”  
 
In response to section 26b: “Have you had any possessions or property 
voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?” Applicant answered, “no.” She 
did not disclose the automobile repossession in 2006 that was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Applicant did not list any of the judgments which were alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 
1.m, and 1.n in response to section 26e which asks, “Have you had a judgment entered 
against you?” It is noted that of the five lawsuits alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, four were actually 
resolved before a judgment was entered against Applicant and one was a non-suit.   
 
The SOR alleges Applicant did not list the debts alleged in SOR paragraphs 1.a, 
and 1.c though 1.k in response to section 26g “Have you had any bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency?” 
 
Applicant answered, “No” in response to section 26m “Have you been over 180 
days delinquent on any debt(s) and in response to 26n “Are you currently over 90 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” The SOR alleges Applicant did not disclose the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.k.  
 
Applicant answered, “No” in response to section 28a, “Involvement in Non-
Criminal Court Actions. In the last 7 years (if an SSBI go back 10 years) have you been 
a party to any public record civil court action(s) not listed elsewhere on this form?” The 
SOR alleges that she did not list the court actions alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k – 1.n. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator conducting her background 
investigation on August 19, 2009. When asked specifically about her delinquent 
accounts, Applicant did not recognize most of the delinquent accounts. In response to 
interrogatories, dated January 6, 2010, Applicant commented on several of her 
delinquent accounts. With regard to the automobile repossession debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c, Applicant did not know why the debt was listed on her credit report with a collection 
agency. Her credit report indicated that the account was paid. She did not believe she 
owed this debt. (Gov 2 at 19) Regarding the medical accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.f, 1.g, and 1.h, Applicant indicated the total balance for all these accounts totaled 
$1,645.  The current balance is now $457.57. (Gov 2 at 19, 39-40) Two accounts were 
disputed and deleted from her credit report in September 2009. (Gov 2 at 19, 36-38) 
 
In her response to the SOR, dated June 12, 2010, Applicant stated that she did 
not intend to falsify any material facts. She did not have a credit report with her when 
she completed her security clearance questionnaire. She answered the questions to the 
best of her knowledge at the time. (Answer to SOR, dated June 12, 2010) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that this was the first time that she 
completed a security clearance questionnaire. She forgot about some of the debts. She 
 
7 
 
 
did not have a copy of her credit report with her when she completed the security 
clearance questionnaire. She did not intend to falsify her security clearance application. 
She did not recall most of her debts. (Tr. 49, 63-64)  
 
Under cross examination, Applicant testified that she did not list the automobile 
repossession in 2006 because she did not have a credit report and she overlooked the 
repossession. (Tr. 73-78) She does not recall the $10,467 judgment entered against her 
in March 2004. (SOR ¶ 1.k)  She admits to being late paying rent, but she always paid 
it. She later recalled the judgment, but stated she disputed the judgment and it was 
removed from her credit reports. She did not list the judgment in response to section 
26(e) because she claims she successfully disputed it. (Tr. 78-89) 
 
She paid her landlord the late rent for the debts in SOR ¶ 1.m. (Tr. 89-91) 
Applicant admits that a judgment was entered against her in February 2006 for the $475 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n and that the judgment was paid through garnishment. (Tr. 91-
93. She remembered her wages being garnished in 2006. She did not remember the 
garnishment at the time she completed the security clearance questionnaire until it was 
brought to her attention during her background investigation. Once she was reminded of 
the garnishment she admitted it. (Tr. 93-95)  
 
Applicant was arrested on June 30, 2005 and charged with Maintaining a 
Dwelling for Drugs and Possession of Marijuana with intent to sell. (SOR ¶ 2.f) Applicant 
disclosed this arrest in response to section 22 of her security clearance questionnaire.  
Applicant went tire shopping with her friend’s boyfriend. When they pulled up to her 
house, they were stopped by police cars. Applicant gave the police consent to search 
her home. The police found two ounces of marijuana on top of Applicant’s kitchen 
cabinets. The police also found a book bag with a scale in it. The book bag and scale 
belonged to her friend’s boyfriend. The boyfriend admitted the marijuana belonged to 
him. Charges against the Applicant were eventually nolle prossed. On June 1, 2009, 
Applicant petitioned to have her records expunged. The expungement was granted on 
July 10, 2009. Applicant no longer socializes with her friend and her friend’s boyfriend. 
(Gov 2 at 8-9; AE B)  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Applicant has received several favorable comments in relation to her job 
performance at her current job. One customer commented:  
 
She is an absolute godsend the past few weeks especially. With tight 
deadlines, constant network, cell and printer issues she has really come 
thru [sic] for us in our time of need. I just wanted to give her credit where 
credit is due because I know that being a one woman show for all DC 
offices must be challenging.  (AE G at 5) 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Another customer states, “To say she is a top notch performer, would be an 
understatement of monumental proportions.” Several others have said favorable things 
about Applicant’s reliability and duty performance. (AE G at 6-15) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
9 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
had financial difficulties for several years. The SOR alleged 14 delinquent accounts. Her 
two largest debts involved an automobile repossession in 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c) and an 
unpaid judgment owed to a former landlord which Applicant disputes. (SOR ¶ 1.k)   
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) is partially applicable. Applicant has had financial problems for several years. 
However, at the present, she has a well-paying job and is in a position to be able to  
resolve her delinquent accounts. She resolved nine of the accounts. She disputes four 
of the accounts. She is saving money to be able to settle the automobile repossession 
debt. This mitigating condition is given less weight because Applicant could have 
started to resolve her delinquent debts sooner. The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h could have been paid off if she had continued to make monthly 
payments after October 2009. She resumed making payments towards this account in 
October 2010. However, she has not incurred additional delinquent debt and she 
appears to have extra income each month that she can apply to her debts. Applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
past financial history and her unresolved debts raise questions about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment, but she receives some credit because she is 
making progress on resolving her delinquent accounts.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s financial 
problems became aggravated when she endured several periods of unemployment in 
2001, 2004, and 2007. She incurred several delinquent medical bills during a period that 
she had no health insurance. Circumstances beyond her control contributed to her 
financial problems. However, I cannot conclude that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances because she could have been more proactive in resolving her accounts 
once she found full-time employment in 2008. She purchased a brand new car that year 
even though she had delinquent debts. While circumstances beyond her control 
contributed to her financial problems, she has not acted responsibly with regards to 
resolving her delinquent accounts.    
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not sought financial counseling. It is likely that Applicant’s 
financial problems will be resolved, but not in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. She is also given partial credit for saving money to 
negotiate a settlement for the automobile repossession debt in SOR ¶1.c. Overall, she 
has made a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent accounts. The few accounts that 
remain unresolved are accounts that she is saving money towards a settlement or she 
disputes the debts.  
 
From 2001 to 2008, Applicant struggled financially. Her financial problems 
happened when she attended college and after several periods of unemployment. She 
incurred several medical debts because she had no health insurance. She now has a 
well-paying job and is a position to resolve her debts. Most of the debts have been 
resolved. Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
11 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant omitted information about her 
financial history in response to section 26 of her security clearance questionnaire. The 
omissions potentially raise AG 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification 
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 While Applicant should have listed information about her past financial problems 
on her security clearance questionnaire, I find her omissions were not deliberate. 
Applicant’s omission about her delinquent finances on her security clearance 
questionnaire was, in part, caused by not having a credit report. She did have several 
judgments, however, most of the judgments were paid off. Several of the debts alleged 
as law suits were paid off before a judgment was entered against Applicant. This was 
Applicant’s first time completing a security clearance questionnaire. Her omissions were 
due to negligence as opposed to a deliberate intent to deceive the Government. When 
asked about her financial situation during her background investigation, Applicant fully 
cooperated with the investigators conducting her background investigation. She 
provided as much information that she was capable of remembering when asked about 
her past debts. Applicant listed her 2005 arrest on her security clearance questionnaire 
which raised a more serious concern. I find she did not deliberately falsify her security 
clearance questionnaire. During this investigation, Applicant learned a difficult lesson 
about the importance of being thorough and detailed on her security clearance 
questionnaire.  
  
 Applicant’s arrest on June 5, 2005, which resulted in charges of Maintaining a 
Dwelling for Drugs, and Possession of Marijuana with Intent to Sell raise the following 
personal conduct disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information);  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing…); and 
 
AG ¶ 16(g) (association with person involved in criminal activity). 
 
12 
 
 
 
 Several personal conduct mitigating conditions potentially apply. They include: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress); and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g) (association with persons involved in criminal activity has 
ceased or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations).  
 
 I find AG ¶ 17(c) applies because more than five years have passed since 
Applicant’s 2005 arrest. Aside from a few traffic citations, she has not been involved in 
criminal conduct since that time. The charges were nolle prossed, and the arrest was 
expunged from her court record in July 2009. Future criminal conduct is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶ 17(e) applies because her cooperation and disclosure of her 2005 arrest 
during her background investigation reduces her vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(g) applies because Applicant no longer associates 
with the person with whom she was arrested who admitted that the marijuana found in 
Applicant’s house and the drug paraphernalia (i.e. scale) belonged to him. She no 
longer socializes with persons involved in criminal activity.  
  
 Applicant admits that her conduct in the past raised concerns about her 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. She has matured and now has an 
understanding of the importance of being accurate on her security clearance 
questionnaire. She mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
13 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
reference evaluations in her current job. I considered her three periods of 
unemployment between 2002 and 2008 while she was also a college student. I 
considered that most of Applicant’s debt was not excessive credit card debt but involved 
medical expenses incurred when she had no health insurance and unpaid rent. With the 
exception of the automobile repossession, her debts appear to be the result of 
struggling to make ends meet rather than someone who is spending money on frivolous 
or expensive items. Applicant now earns a good income. She has resolved 13 of the 
accounts through payment or disputes. She disputes the $10,000 judgment owed to her 
former landlord alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She is putting money aside in order to be in a 
position to settle her automobile repossession debt. Her financial situation has improved 
greatly. Aside from a few traffic offenses, she has not been arrested since 2005 and no 
longer associates with the individual with whom she was arrested. Applicant should 
have listed her past financial difficulties in response to section 26 of her security 
clearance questionnaire. However, I find her omissions to be unintentional. She listed 
her more serious 2005 criminal offense so I find it unlikely she intended to deceive the 
Government when she omitted her delinquent debts and judgments. This was the first 
time she completed a security clearance questionnaire. She learned a lesson about the 
importance of being thorough on her security clearance questionnaire in the future. 
Applicant has encountered financial problems for a long time. She is now financially 
stable. While she has not resolved all of her debts, she has a plan in place to resolve 
them. She mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations and personal 
conduct.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.f -o:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.f:   For Applicant 
   
 
14 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
