1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-01712
SSN: ------------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has a history
of financial problems, which are ongoing. That history includes a Chapter 7 bankruptcy
case in 2001, and more recently delinquent accounts, repossession of a vehicle, and
foreclosure upon a rental property. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to
overcome the security concerns raised by her history of financial problems.
Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which are identified as exhibits in this decision.  
 Exhibit 4. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on August 10,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion. Neither Applicant nor
Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.2
On or about September 1, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case consisting
of all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-3
called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by her on
September 16, 2010. She then had a 30-day period to submit a response setting forth
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. To date, she has not
replied. The case was assigned to me November 8, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a federal contractor, and she completed a
security clearance application in November 2008.  In the application, she reported4
working for the same company in various capacities since 1980 except for the period
November 2000 to May 2002, when she was laid off. She is currently working as a
quality control inspector. She was unemployed for a month after the job layoff in 2000.
She then worked as a sales clerk at a department store from December 2000 to August
 Exhibit 9. 5
 Answer to SOR. 6
 Exhibits 7, 8, and 9. 7
 Answer to SOR. 8
 Exhibit 9. 9
3
2001, and as an administrative assistant for a local police department from August 2001
to May 2002, when she was recalled by her current employer. Her employment history
also includes working as a part-time aerobic instructor or fitness trainer since 1990.
Applicant has married and divorced twice, and she is currently living with a man
in a spouse-like relationship. She has two children, daughters, born in 1986 and 1989,
both of whom live with Applicant. In addition to her two adult children, a granddaughter,
born in 2008, lives with Applicant. The 21-year-old son of her partner also lives in the
household. Applicant’s father is deceased, but her mother lives nearby. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that began shortly after her job
layoff in 2000. As a result, Applicant was unable to meet her financial obligations and
sought relief via a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The case
was filed in about September 2001, and the court granted Applicant a discharge in
bankruptcy in January 2002.  The record is silent concerning the number of creditors,5
the estimated assets, and the estimated liabilities in the bankruptcy case. Applicant
attributes the bankruptcy to the job layoff and the resulting 18-month period of
unemployment and underemployment.  6
In addition to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, Applicant reported more recent
financial problems in her 2008 security clearance application as follows: (1) foreclosure
upon a rental property; (2) repossession of two vehicles; (3) a delinquent credit card
account charged off as a bad debt; and (4) a delinquent utility account on the rental
property. These debts, all of which are alleged in the SOR, are addressed below.
In response to SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant admits a $1,116 collection account that
began as a credit card or charge account with a large store. She fell behind on the
account in 2007, and the account was charged off and then placed for collection with
the current creditor.  Applicant reports that she contacted the creditor and was7
negotiating the matter.  Applicant did not present any documentation on this debt. 8
In response to SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant admits that a rental property, purchased in
2003, was subject to foreclosure. She reports that she fell behind on the mortgage loan
payments in 2007, when her tenants stopped paying monthly rent and she was unable
to keep up with the payment. A 2008 credit report describes the loan as 180 days past
due in the amount of $8,219 with a balance of $54,283.  A 2009 credit report shows the9
 Exhibit 8. 10
 Exhibit 7. 11
 Answer to SOR. 12
 Exhibits 7, 8, and 9. 13
 Exhibits 8 and 9. 14
 Exhibit 7. 15
 Exhibit 7 and 9. 16
 Exhibit 6. 17
4
loan was past due in the amount of $11,155.  And a 2010 credit report indicates the10
loan was past due in the amount of $19,000 and in foreclosure.  Applicant reports that11
the home was sold via foreclosure in August 2009, and she is waiting to hear if she
owes a deficiency balance.  Applicant did not present any documentation on this debt. 12
 In response to SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant denies indebtedness stemming from
repossession of a vehicle. Applicant reports that this debt resulted from her partner’s
purchase of a truck for his son who then failed to make the loan payments. She denies
that she cosigned for the loan, although her partner did so. Although this account
appears on Applicant’s credit reports as a repossession, all three credit reports show a
zero balance as well as a zero past-due balance on the account.  Applicant did not13
present any documentation on this debt.
In response to SOR ¶ 1.e, Applicant admits indebtedness of $9,429 stemming
from repossession of a vehicle. Applicant reports this debt resulted from her cosigning a
loan with her daughter who then failed to make the loan payments when she was
unable to work due to pregnancy. The 2008 and 2009 credit reports describe this debt
as a repossession or charged-off account in the amount of $9,429.  The 2010 credit14
report shows the debt was transferred or sold to another creditor.  Applicant did not15
present any documentation on this debt. 
In response to SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant admits indebtedness of $329 stemming from
a utility bill for her rental property. Applicant reports that she contacted the utility and
offered to make weekly payments of $25, but the utility could not locate the account.
Both the 2008 and 2010 credit reports describe it as a charged-off account.  Applicant16
did not present any documentation on this debt. 
Applicant reports that her current financial problems stem from circumstances
beyond her control.  She reports that her mother became ill and she had to assume17
responsibility for her mother’s care and expenses. And about the same time, her
daughter became pregnant and was unable to work, resulting in Applicant covering her
daughter’s expenses as well. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to18
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.23
5
Applicant did not reply to the FORM. Likewise, the record is silent concerning
Applicant’s good employment record or constructive community involvement. The
record is also silent concerning Applicant’s overall financial situation; for example, her
current income, her financial assets (checking or savings accounts, investment
accounts, etc.), and her ability to repay any of the indebtedness addressed above along
with her current financial obligations. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As18
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt19
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An20
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  21
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting22
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An23
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 26
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).27
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.28
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 29
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an30
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  31
6
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate24
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme25
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.26
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.27
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it28
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant29
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline30
F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  31
 AG ¶ 19(a).  32
 AG ¶ 19(c). 33
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f). 34
7
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry. Indeed, the practice of evaluating a person
based on their record of financial responsibility (or lack thereof) is used in various
industries. For example, the insurance industry uses credit-based insurance scores
when determining insurance rates because the scores have been found to be effective
in predicting future losses.  
The evidence here, except for the repossession of her partner’s son’s truck and
resulting indebtedness, supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems. That repossession is not fairly attributable to Applicant, and SOR ¶ 1.d is
resolved in her favor. Her history of financial problems raises security concerns because
it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting32
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to33
establish these two disqualifying conditions.  
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:34
20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).35
8
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are subparagraphs 20(a)
and 20(b). It appears Applicant’s financial problems were caused by unique
circumstances largely beyond her control—the job layoff in 2000 and the nonpaying
tenants in 2007. Both events led to major financial problems—the bankruptcy and the
foreclosure on the rental property. In addition, family circumstances placed a financial
burden on Applicant. 
Applicant is required to act responsibly under the circumstances in order to
receive full credit in mitigation under subparagraph 20(b), and she has not met that
requirement. A responsible applicant would have made the effort to present
documentation in support of her case. Applicant did not present any documentation
showing the current status of the debts in the SOR. Likewise, she did not present
documentary proof of payment, in full or in part, of the debts. Applicant did not present
documentary evidence of her ability to repay. And she failed to present a realistic plan
of action to resolve the indebtedness. Lacking such a plan, as well as any measurable
progress in working the plan, the credit in mitigation is insufficient to mitigate the
security concerns. Indeed, had Applicant paid the two smallest debts (the $1,116
collection account and the $329 utility account) and presented documentation showing
some progress on the other two debts, I might have decided this case for her. But
based on this record, a favorable decision is not justified. At bottom, Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems raise doubts or questions about her judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.
To conclude, following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these
doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept.  Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden35
of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
