                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06289 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borsgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 3, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 10, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on October 21, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and two witnesses testified. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted without objections. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 29, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He is not married. He has a 16-year-old son who lives 
with him. He graduated from high school in 1988. He has worked for his present 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2008. He has worked for other federal contractors 
in the past and has held a security clearance since approximately 2004.1  
 
 In 2004, Applicant’s father asked him to co-sign a loan for a mortgage for a 
house. His father could not get the loan by himself. His stepmother did not have good 
credit. There were two loans on his father’s house. Applicant co-signed both loans. 
They are listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant understood that by co-signing the 
loans he bore the responsibility to ensure the loans were paid. At the time, his father 
was employed. He earned about $77,000 annually and his wife earned about $68,000 
annually. From 2004 to 2008, Applicant’s father made the payments on the mortgages.2  
 
 In 2008, Applicant’s father was diagnosed with an illness and he lost his job. 
Applicant helped his father as much as he could to pay the loans. They tried to 
renegotiate a different payment plan with the creditor, but were unsuccessful. When his 
father returned to work, it was at a job that paid a third of what he had previously been 
earning. They attempted to obtain mortgage hardship assistance in November 2008. 
Applicant’s father made some payments from his savings. The last payment that was 
made on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b was in July 2008. This debt is for the first mortgage. 
Applicant attempted to set up a payment arrangement, but the house is foreclosured. 
The house has not been sold. The amount of the loan is $391,000.3 Applicant’s father 
did not want to move in with Applicant because it would have required a longer 
commute to his job. His father exhausted his savings to make house payments. He now 
rents an apartment. His father has not made any payments on this loan since 2008.  
 
 Applicant stopped making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($71,708), the 
second loan on the house, in September 2008. He and his father negotiated a payment 
plan and his father resumed making payments in February 2010. He has been paying 
$310 monthly on that debt.4 
 
1 Tr. 57, 92-94. 
 
2 Tr. 24-44, 97-108. 
 
3 Id.; AE P. 
 
4 Tr. 31-35; GE 4; AE M, O. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is no longer past due. Applicant has an automatic 
payment arrangement to ensure timely payment. He had a payment plan in place and 
was unaware that he had to contact the creditor to renew it. It lapsed without him 
knowing. He has since renewed the plan.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is for the mortgage on Applicant’s personal house. The 
amount of the loan is $366,000. He was current on his payments until his father had 
problems paying his mortgage. When his father could no longer pay the mortgage on 
his house, Applicant put his personal house up for sale in September 2008. Applicant 
and his fiancée had purchased their house jointly in 2004. She helped pay the 
mortgage. In December 2008, they separated. She had been paying the utilities for the 
house. When she moved out she continued to help with the expenses for awhile, but 
then could no longer afford to do so. Applicant became responsible for the monthly 
payments and expenses. They unsuccessfully attempted to modify the loan. He paid the 
monthly payments until December 2009, when he could no longer afford to pay. 
Applicant stated he has been actively trying to sell his house for the past two years, but 
has been unsuccessful. He has only been able to make partial mortgage payments on 
and off for the past five or six months. He attempted to “short sale” the house, but was 
unsuccessful. Applicant is attempting to resolve the mortgage debt for his house by a 
“deed in lieu” process. At this juncture, that has not transpired and the debt remains 
unresolved.6  
 
 Applicant has ten credit cards that he pays approximately $900 on monthly. He 
estimated the total balance on the cards is between $15,000 and $20,000. How much 
he pays monthly towards his credit card debt fluctuates, depending on how much 
money he has, but he always makes minimum payments. He and his former fiancée 
explained that he used the credit cards to fund repairs and renovations required for their 
house when they moved in. He purchased a luxury car in 2008 for $55,000. He pays 
about $995 a month in car payments. His fiancée helped him make the payments for a 
short period of time after she moved out, but no longer provides help.7  
 
 Applicant does not have a written budget and has not received any financial 
counseling. He explained he does keep track of his money, but not formally on paper. 
He has a nominal amount of money in his checking and savings account, but stated he 
has an emergency fund.8  
 
 Applicant stated when his father asked him for financial help he felt obligated to 
co-sign the loan. He could not allow his father to be without a home. He cannot pay the 
loan on his father’s house. When his fiancée moved out, it created an additional 
5 Tr. 44-45; AE N, K. 
 
6 Tr. 46-56, 59-63; 111-123; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 56-57, 66-74, 77-82, 111-123. 
 
8 Tr. 84-87. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
financial burden and he could no longer make the payments on his own house. He does 
not believe he was irresponsible in co-signing his father’s loan because his father 
needed a place to live. He stated he could not force his father to live with him. Applicant 
confirmed that until he sells his house he will continue to have financial problems. 
 
 I have considered all of the character letters provided by Applicant. He is 
described as hardworking, responsible, reliable, conscientious, respectful, honest and 
trustworthy. He is considered a professional in the workplace.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
9 AE L. 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has two delinquent debts that remain unpaid and unresolved. His debts 
are for two mortgages on properties that are in foreclosure. The total amount owed on 
the combined loans is $757,000. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent because two remain unresolved and unpaid. I find 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant co-signed loans for his father. 
He did this during a time when Applicant had significant obligations to pay. His father 
became ill and could not pay the mortgages. Applicant and his fiancé separated and he 
was responsible for paying the total amount of his own mortgage. Applicant’s father is 
repaying the second mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant resolved the payment issue for 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He has been attempting to resolve the unpaid mortgages, but 
has been unsuccessful. He has tried to sell his home and sought hardship assistance. I 
find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problems were largely beyond his control. However, Applicant was on notice when his 
father could not obtain a loan on his own, that his father may experience financial 
problems in the future. Applicant did not plan for that contingency and did not ensure he 
could afford to pay the loans, if necessary. I find he did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has not received any financial counseling and does not have a 
budget. He is hoping to resolve his mortgage debt through a transfer in deed, but that 
has not yet occurred. The mortgage on his father’s home is still unresolved. His father 
has been paying the second loan on the home. Until Applicant can resolve the 
mortgage debts that total approximately $757,000, it is too early to conclude that they 
are not a security concern. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and 20 (d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 (a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant and 
his fiancé bought a house together in 2004. Applicant co-signed loans for his father, 
who then was unable to pay the loans because he lost his job due to illness. Applicant 
and his fiancée separated. He became responsible for paying the mortgage on their 
home. He found he did not have the resources to pay all of the debts he owed. The two 
mortgage debts remain unpaid. Applicant wanted to help his father. Although admirable, 
when his father could no longer pay his bills, Applicant could not fulfill his obligation. 
Applicant is attempting to resolve the debts he owes, but at this juncture they remain 
unresolved. Therefore, it is too early to conclude that Applicant’s delinquent debts are 
no longer a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
