1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-01272
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I  deny
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on September 12, 2009. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) (Item 1) on July 21, 2010, detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, Financial Considerations, that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny
him a security clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Item 4.1
Id.; Item 6.2
Item 6.3
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 27, 2010. (Item 2) He
submitted a notarized, written response to the SOR allegations dated July 28, 2010, and
requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3) 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on September 20, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on
September 24, 2010. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response or
additional documentation. DOHA assigned this case to me on November 19, 2010. The
Government submitted eight exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-8 and
admitted into the record.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR.
His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. He also provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works as a security officer for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began this employment in July 2009.1
Applicant served in the U.S. Army reserve for six years and received an
honorable discharge. He and his wife married in November 1978. They have two
daughters, ages 31 and 24, and a son, aged 29. One daughter and two grandchildren
recently moved into his house, after his daughter lost her job.  2
Applicant worked as a corrections officer for 22 years, retiring in 2001. From
2001 until 2009, he operated a home improvement contracting business. At the
inception of his business, he purchased tools and equipment. His business required him
to pay certain ongoing expenses, such as workers’ compensation insurance, liability
insurance, and licensing costs, even if he did not have work. His business contracts
fluctuated, causing problems with a steady income. He incurred debts, some
unexpected, for his business, even when he did not have work. He used his credit cards
to pay these expenses. His financial problems started in 2005, as he did not have
sufficient income from his business to meet his business expenses and pay his credit
cards.3
Item 5; Item 6.4
Item 6.5
Item 1, Item 7; Item 8.6
3
Applicant receives $2,000 a month net income from his pension and $800 a
month in net income from his job. His wife receives $2,000 a month in net income. His
total household net income is $4,800. He listed total monthly expenses at $2,900 at his
meeting with the security clearance investigator. He submitted additional information
about his expenses with his responses to interrogatories. He identified $1,060 in
expenses incurred by his wife, which were not previously listed. These expenses
increased his monthly expenses to $3,960. Based on these numbers, he has
approximately $840 a month to pay his debts.4
Applicant hired a debt consolidation company to help resolve his debt problems.
He made two payments to the company, which then went out of business. The company
did not pay any of his debts. He also contacted his creditors, who requested that he pay
his back payments on his accounts before the companies would discuss a payment
plan with him. He could not meet these demands. He has not made any further contacts
with his creditors. He has not filed for bankruptcy.5
The SOR lists seven debts, five of which are under $775. His largest debt is for
more than $29,000,and the one remaining debt is for approximately $1,500. Applicant
has not provided proof of payment on any of these debts. The credit reports of record
reflect that he paid two other collection debts, which are not shown on the SOR.  6
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
5
Applicant incurred significant debt when he operated his home improvement
contracting business. He has been unable to resolve all the debts resulting from this
business. These debts remain unpaid. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and especially the following:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems began when he started his home improvement
business. His business did not progress as he had anticipated, causing his income to
fluctuate and making payment of his debts difficult. He provided no evidence which
indicates that he attempted to reduce his business expenses when his business income
declined. Rather, he used his credit cards to pay his business expenses. When his
debts became unmanageable, he contacted a debt consolidation company for
assistance. This company went out of business after taking two checks from him and
without paying any of his debts. He did not contact another company for assistance.
The lack of business income and the dissolution of the debt consolidation company are
events that were out of his control. However, he has not provided information which
showed he acted reasonably under the circumstances. He did not exercise good
judgment in the management of his business expenses. He is entitled to partial credit
under AG ¶ 20(b) because of the events out of his control.
Applicant has not received credit counseling and has not provided proof of a
good faith effort to resolve his debts. He has not disputed the debts listed in the SOR.
6
His debts are not resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not
applicable.
Likewise, AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. Applicant purchased materials and
supplies for his business even when he did not have work or income. These poor
financial decisions negatively impacted him, resulting in unpaid debts. He has not
resolved any of the debts listed in the SOR, even the smaller debts. He has not
demonstrated due diligence in dealing with his debts.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or deny a
security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both favorable and
unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the evidence of record,
not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is established and then
whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a
reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
served honorably in the military and worked as a corrections officer for 22 years before
retiring. He has been married for many years and has three grown children. He provided
housing for his daughter and two grandchildren after she lost her job. His financial
problems began shortly after he decided to operate a small business. His business
income fluctuated, even in good economic times. When he did not have business
income, he did not control his expenses, creating significant business debt, which is not
resolved. He has not made an effort to resolve even the smaller debts in the SOR.
While immediate resolution of his largest debt is not possible, he had sufficient funds to
7
resolve the remaining debts in the SOR quickly, but chose not to do so. His unpaid
debts remain a security concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
