 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                 )  ISCR Case No. 10-01612 
                                                                      )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
adjudicative guideline (AG) G, Alcohol Consumption, and AG J, Criminal Conduct.    
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on September 27, 2009. On August 25, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under AG G, Alcohol Consumption, and AG J, Criminal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 8, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested 
that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. On September 28, 2010, 
the Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
 
2 
 
 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10. By letter dated September 29, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 4, 2010. His response was due on November 3, 2010. On November 1, 2010, 
the case was assigned to me for a decision. Applicant filed a two-page letter in 
response to the FORM within the required time period. Department Counsel did not 
object to the admission of Applicant’s additional information. Accordingly, I marked 
Applicant’s letter as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it to the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG G, 
Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.), and one allegation of disqualifying 
conduct under AG J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.). SOR ¶ 2.a. alleges that Applicant’s 
alcohol-related arrests, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., and 1.d. under AG G, also 
constitute criminal conduct under AG J. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the seven AG G allegations and the one AG J allegation. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item  4.) 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old, married, and the father of two adult children. He has 
been employed by a government contractor since July 2008 as an engineering 
manager. From 1984 to 2008, he worked for one employer as a production manager. In 
2004, he received a master’s degree. He has not previously held a security clearance.  
(Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol in 1977, when he was 18 years old. From 1977 
to at least December 2009, Applicant consumed alcohol at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication. Since 2003, Applicant and his wife each drink as many as three 
beers together each day. On weekends, they individually drink as many as six beers a 
day. Applicant defines intoxication as drinking 8 to 10 beers and being unable to walk 
straight. He admits to drinking to intoxication only one time, in 2000. (Item 6 at 5.) 
 
 In 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence 
(DUI). He was detained overnight in jail and released the next morning on bail. The 
case was later dismissed and Applicant’s bail was returned to him. (Item 6 at 3-4.) 
 
 In July 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with public intoxication, a 
misdemeanor. The charge was later dismissed. (Item 6; Item 10.) 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs and (2) Blood Alcohol Level .08% or Higher. He was 
found guilty of Count (2), sentenced to three years probation, ordered to attend level 2 
of the first offender drinking driver’s program within nine months, and ordered to pay 
certain fees and a fine of $1,651. Count (1) was dismissed. Applicant’s three-year 
probation ends on February 20, 2011. (Item 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 For approximately one year, from March 2008 until March 2009, Applicant 
received outpatient alcohol treatment at a medical facility in his home community. A 
licensed psychologist in the facility’s chemical dependency services diagnosed 
Applicant as alcohol dependent. One of his treatment goals was continued and ongoing 
abstinence. From June 2008 until September 2008, Applicant attended weekly meetings 
of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). (Item 6 at 5; Item 8 at 4-5.) 
 
 In January 2008, Applicant enrolled in a DUI education program. He completed 
the program in October 2008. The progress report summarizing Applicant’s completion 
of the DUI education program states: “[Applicant’s] records only contain Attendance and 
Completion. Because our program is Educational in nature we make no prognoses on 
recovery or rehabilitation.” (Item 9.) 
 
 Despite his treatment for alcohol dependence, Applicant continued to drink 
alcohol. The clinical records of his treatment for alcohol dependence reflect that he had 
resumed alcohol consumption in January 2009. In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
stated that he was no longer consuming alcohol excessively but was drinking in 
moderation. (Item 8 at 22; AE A.) 
  
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions. I 
conclude that Guideline G disqualifying conditions at ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(f) 
apply in Applicant’s case. AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(d) reads: 
 
5 
 
 
“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, 
or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.” AG ¶ 22(f) reads: “relapse 
after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program.” 
   
In 2002 and 2007, Applicant was arrested for alcohol-related driving offenses. In 
2003, he was arrested for public intoxication. Applicant is a habitual consumer of 
alcohol, and he admits consuming alcohol at times to excess between 1977 and 
December 2009. However, despite two arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol,  
a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, and treatment for alcohol dependence, he 
continues to drink alcohol. He has participated in alcohol awareness education, and he 
is presumably aware of the serious consequences to himself and to others of driving 
under the influence of alcohol. These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a),  
22(c), 22(d), and 22(f). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant is now 51 years old. He admitted alcohol-related conduct from 1977 to 
December 2009, a period of 32 years. His most recent arrest for driving under the 
influence of alcohol occurred in December 2007, and he remains under a sentence of 
probation from that conviction until February 2011. He has participated in alcohol 
awareness education. He has been diagnosed as alcohol dependent; he has undergone 
treatment for alcohol dependence, and he continues to drink alcohol. Accordingly, I 
conclude that none of the Guideline G mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
 Applicant was arrested for public intoxication in 2003. He was arrested for DUI in 
2002 and 2007. After his 2007 arrest, he was convicted of having a blood alcohol level 
of .08 % or higher, and he was sentenced to three years of probation for that offense. 
His probation will not expire until February 2011. This behavior raises concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d). AG ¶ 31(a) identifies a potential security concern when 
an individual has committed “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 
31(c) provides: “allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” AG ¶ 31(d) provides: 
“individual is currently on parole or probation.”  
 
  Two mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior, which began in 
2002, has continued to the present, and is, therefore, recent. As a person diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent, Applicant has not yet established a record of sobriety to assure that 
his long-standing criminal behavior and rule violations related to alcohol use are unlikely 
to recur. His lack of successful rehabilitation raises security concerns about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  I conclude that neither AG ¶ 32(a) nor 
AG ¶ 32 (d) applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who is 
well-educated and skilled. His employer has entrusted him with managerial 
responsibilities. 
 
At the same time, in the last eight years, Applicant has been arrested twice for 
driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. After his arrest in 2007, he was 
ordered to take a course in alcohol education. He was also diagnosed and treated for 
alcohol dependency. Even after being made aware of the dangers of drinking and 
driving, he continues to drink alcohol. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his 
current trustworthiness and reliability.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his   
alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.  - 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                            ________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
