1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-01469
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On August 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C
(Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on
September 1, 2006. 
In her May 26, 2010, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations
raised, provided written explanations, and requested a hearing before an administrative
judge. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2010. Department Counsel and
Applicant agreed to an October 20, 2010, hearing date. A Notice of Hearing was issued
by DOHA on October 8, 2010, setting the hearing for that date.
The hearing took place as scheduled. The Government did not request
administrative notice of any specific facts or materials related to the country at issue,
 See Tr. 13-16.1
 Tr. 15.2
 Tr. 15-16; Ex. A (Letter, dated Oct. 14, 2010).3
 Tr. 22. Applicant’s work generally involves projects in which the military and NGOs work in concert.4
 In one instance, Applicant was the recipient of a grant from a Canadian NGO that, in turn, had received a5
grant from the Canadian government. Her grant paid only for her travel, not her salary. Applicant never had
direct contact with the Canadian government. See Tr. 21.
2
Canada, a parliamentary democracy. Department Counsel withdrew all allegations set
forth in the SOR under paragraph 2 (Guideline B). Department Counsel submitted three
exhibits (Ex.) which were accepted into the record as Exs. 1-3 without objection.
Applicant gave testimony and offered two documents, accepted into the record without
objection as Exs. A-B. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 28, 2010, and the
record was closed. Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony,
security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old research specialist and consultant who has worked for
the same defense contractor for over 15 years. An expert in international relations and
areas related to managerial oversight, she has earned a bachelor’s degree, a master’s
degree, and a doctorate in related disciplines. She is married and has two minor
children. 
Several years ago, Applicant was approached by the military to employ her
expertise on projects being conducted domestically and abroad.  Her success led to1
related projects in countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan. She continues to work on
such projects today through her employer.  The military requested that she seek a2
security clearance in order to better utilize her skills and experience.3
At issue are five allegations under Guideline C. In 1989, Applicant married a
Canadian citizen. They considered the option of living in Canada. In 1990, Applicant
applied for and was granted Canadian citizenship, even though she was born and
educated in the United States. The couple divorced in 1994. Applicant abandoned any
plans to live in Canada. 
In 1999, Applicant remarried. The couple eventually had two children. Applicant
began working on the aforementioned projects for the military and related work for non-
governmental organizations (NGO).  All of her work is sponsored by her employer and4
none of it is sponsored by a foreign country.  In 2005, she was scheduled to work on a5
project in Iraq. Around that time, a group of American and Canadian citizens had been
taken hostage in Iraq. Of that group, the American hostages were killed, while the
 Applicant has not exercised any other rights or privileges of Canadian citizenship. She has not voted in any6
Canadian elections, received benefits from the country, and has neither a preference for, nor an allegiance
to, Canada. See Tr. 9.
 Tr. 9-10.7
 Tr. 17.8
 Tr. 25.9
 Tr. 18-19. Applicant noted that had she been on trips or taken vacations solely to European countries, she10
would have used her United States passport. She reserved her use of the Canadian passport for business
trips to countries where her presence might raise a “red flag” or cause concerns about her personal safety.
 Tr. 10, 24; Ex. B (Letter, dated Oct. 19, 2010).11
 Tr. 10.12
 Id.13
 Tr. 21-23. 14
 Ex. A, supra, note 3.15
3
Canadian hostages were released.  Applicant also learned of difficulty she might6
endure in fulfilling her work in certain countries who find those who have visited certain
other countries as suspect.  In light of these considerations, Applicant concluded it7
would be best for her to conduct her business travel to certain middle eastern countries
on a Canadian passport.  The idea was solely her own.  She applied for and was8 9
granted a Canadian passport shortly before her trip to Iraq. Applicant subsequently
used the Canadian passport for work related travel to Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan, Indonesia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Phillippines, and Afghanistan, as well as during connecting flights
through Switzerland and Germany.   10
Applicant’s Canadian passport expired in August 2010. She has given the
expired document to her security officer.  She has no future plans to use her Canadian11
passport.  At the hearing, she noted that she has not attempted to renew her Canadian12
passport, and she expressed no immediate plans to renew that document.  13
The transcript and record indicate that Applicant’s work is highly valued by the
U.S. military and NGOs. Department Counsel noted that her work is highly valued by
the DOD and the U.S. military.  The DOD is aware of the facts in this matter. The U.S.14
military considers her work and her access to classified information to be “critical to the
contribution she could potentially make to [its] programs.”  Applicant stresses that it15
was not her idea to pursue a security clearance. While she is happy to be of service to
 Tr. 16.16
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).17
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).18
4
the U.S. military, she is not seeking either the work or a security clearance for personal
or financial benefit.   16
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and were considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a17
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  18
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 Id.19
 Id.20
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.21
 AG ¶ 9.22
 AG ¶ 10(a). 23
5
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access19
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily20
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the21
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence and after the withdrawal of SOR
paragraph 2, I find Guideline C (Foreign Preference) to be the most pertinent to the
case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are discussed
below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then she may be
prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the
U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include22
exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  23
The SOR contains five allegations. First, Applicant sought and was granted
Canadian citizenship in 1990. Second, she applied for and received a Canadian
passport in 2005 that expired in August 2010. Third, she used her Canadian passport
for business travel to or through 10 foreign countries. Fourth, Applicant had expressed
an intent to renew her Canadian passport. Fifth, she traveled abroad for a work project
and a foreign agency funded by the Canadian government paid for her travel expenses.
 Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship24
or birth in a foreign country), AG ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship), AG ¶ 11(c) (exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before
the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor), and AG ¶ 11(f) (the vote in a foreign
election was encouraged by the United States Government) do not apply.
6
Applicant substantially admitted these allegations. Foreign Preference Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This
includes, but is not limited to (1) possession of a current foreign passport) and AG
¶10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American
citizen). With foreign preference disqualifying conditions raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
Applicant fully admitted that she sought Canadian citizenship 20 years ago,
when she was married to her ex-husband, a Canadian, and that the newlyweds
contemplated living in Canada. After their divorce, Applicant expressed no interest in
maintaining a Canadian residence and exercised no rights or privileges of Canadian
citizenship until 2005. By that time, she was working on projects with the U.S. military
and significant NGOs involved in projects in the Middle East. She acquired a Canadian
passport to better facilitate her safe passage to certain countries. As well, an alternative
to her U.S. passport would obviate potential difficulties in visiting some countries to
which prior travel to other countries was prohibited or deemed suspect. All of the travel
at issue has been for work projects related to her efforts with the U.S. military and
specified NGOs. Consequently, it may be assumed that such travel was at least tacitly
approved by the U.S. Government. Moreover, the U.S. military has encouraged
Applicant to pursue a security clearance to benefit the United States, not the Applicant.
Her continued and enhanced participation in its projects is deemed critical. 
Applicant has voluntarily tendered her expired Canadian passport to her security
officer. This fact is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated).   24
Applicant’s distinct knowledge and experience is of importance to the U.S.
military and the DOD. She is a valuable asset to current efforts domestically and
internationally. Her maintenance of a Canadian passport was not covert, and her
international travel was known to the U.S. Government and her employer. She has
since tendered her Canadian passport to her security officer. Given these unique facts,
foreign preference security concerns are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
7
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the nine “whole-person”
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a highly credible and mature individual. She is
well-educated and a leader in her field. Her notoriety brought her to the attention of the
U.S. military; she did not seek additional work from it. Applicant’s efforts for the U.S.
Government and significant NGOs has been lauded. Her continued work efforts are
deemed critical to important U.S. projects. She has conducted her business efforts with
transparency.
While Applicant has proven herself to be a valued asset to the U.S. Government,
she is neither a governmental employee nor a member of the armed services. A civilian,
Applicant balances her work responsibilities with her domestic obligations. Her personal
safety is an understandable concern. In traveling abroad independently into areas
posing significant risks and with conflicting rules regarding travelers, she chose to utilize
her Canadian citizenship to acquire a Canadian passport that would facilitate safer
passage through regions posing genuine concern. She did so on numerous
international trips for the U.S. military and designated NGOs without incident or
reprimand. Her Canadian passport has since expired. She has tendered it to her
security officer for safekeeping. She has no immediate plans to use a foreign passport
in her travels. Given her work, these unique facts, the country at issue, and the record
as a whole, Applicant mitigated foreign preference security concerns. Clearance
granted.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a(1)-1.a(5): For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
