 
 
 
 
1
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-01008 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On June 29, 2009, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing Investigation Request (e-QIP). On June 2, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines that were effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 28, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On August 9, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to 
 
 
 
 
2
me. On September 7, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for 
September 23, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and called one witness. He offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A into evidence 
without objection. The record remained open until October 18, 2010, in order to provide 
him time to submit additional documents. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 28, 2010. He timely submitted AE B through D. Department Counsel had no 
objection and the evidence was admitted.                                                       
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied both allegations.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and married. He and his wife have four children. He was 
born and raised on military bases. His father is a retired high-ranking enlisted U.S. 
Marine. In February 1998, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps. He was the 
honor graduate for his class. He served as a military policeman and was on a special 
reaction team. He earned numerous medals and commendations for his service. He 
held a Secret security clearance while a Marine. He was on active duty until February 
2002 when he was honorably discharged in the paygrade of E-4. He left military service 
in order to earn more money and remain at home with his family. (Tr. 22.)  
 
 Applicant worked for a state’s highway patrol unit for nine months before 
beginning a well-paying position as a granite and stone installer with a private company 
in November 2002. He worked for that company until the middle of 2008, when he lost 
his position because of the economic slow down in the construction market. He was 
unemployed for six months before starting a job with another installation company in 
January 2009. He worked with that company until May 2009, when the company went 
bankrupt. (GE 4 at 143.) In June 2009, he began his current employment as a 
dispatcher with a federal contractor. He would like to enter the federal police force in the 
future. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 While working for the first installation company, Applicant was earning about 
$100,000 annually and his wife was earning about $69,000 at her civilian job. Based on 
that income, they decided to buy a piece of property and build a house in early 2008, 
before he lost his job. (Tr. 24; GE 5 at 132.) During the construction of the house, they 
purchased building materials from a home improvement store on a line-of-credit. After 
losing his job in late 2008, he earned a smaller salary with the second installation 
company during the first six months of 2009. He and his wife were unable to maintain 
the $945 monthly payment on the $49,500 line-of-credit debt from the home 
improvement store. The creditor increased the payment to $1,900 per month and then 
to $5,000, seemingly because he missed making payments. (GE 5 at 132.) He and his 
wife tried to refinance their house in order to pay the debt, but were unable to do so. 
During this period of reduced income, they used their savings to keep their ongoing 
debts current, but were unable to make large payments on the home improvement debt. 
 
 
 
 
3
They tried to establish a workable repayment plan with the creditor, but were unable to 
do so. (Tr. 47.)  
 
 In June 2009, Applicant completed an e-QIP. In response to “Section 26: 
Financial Record: h. Have you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? m. Have you been over 180 days delinquent 
on any debt(s),” and n. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts(s),” he 
answered “no,” and failed to list the delinquent home improvement account. Applicant 
acknowledged that he did not include the debt, but denied that he intentionally falsified 
the e-QIP. (Tr. 43.) He testified that the omission was “purely accidental.” (Tr. 42.) He 
explained that he initially filled out an employment packet that contained information 
about his finances, which he intended to reference while completing the e-QIP. When 
he was directed to submit the e-QIP, he learned that his employer lost that packet and 
he promptly telephoned his wife for financial information. He spoke to her while he was 
completing the application on-line at work because his employer wanted it finished 
immediately. (Tr. 42-43.) Based on his military experience, he knew the government 
would perform a background investigation and discover any discrepancies. He made an 
“honest mistake” when he completed the 50-page form and apologized for his error. (Tr. 
43-44 46.) Under Section 28, he disclosed a non-criminal court action in which he and 
his wife were sued in Small Claims court. (GE 1.)  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified. She is a staff sergeant in the U.S. Marine Corps and on 
active duty until May 2011. She works with the Military Police Department and is a 
physical security specialist. She holds a security clearance. She manages the family’s 
finances. In April 2010, she again contacted the home improvement company’s 
collection agency to establish a repayment plan and learned that a new company was 
handling the account. The company representative told her that they qualified for a 
Hardship Arrangement and allowed them to establish a $200 per month repayment plan 
for one year and then the situation would be reevaluated. They have made those 
payments on that plan since April 2010. (GE 4 at 44; AE A.) They intend to pay this 
debt. (Id.) They recently paid off a car loan and are current on all other financial 
obligations. (Tr. 54.) Credit bureau reports (CBR), dated July 2009 and March 2010, 
confirm her assertion that all of their ongoing obligations and debts are current. (GE 2, 
3.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife verified that she received a telephone call from her husband 
while he was completing the e-QIP. She was at work at the time. She related their 
financial information to him. She does not believe that he intentionally left the 
information about the large debt off the e-QIP, but rather did so accidently. (Tr. 55.) 
Both of them are aware of the government’s investigative process involving security 
clearances and its ability to discover undisclosed information. (Tr. 56.)  
 
 In April 2010, Applicant submitted the family budget. Their net monthly income is 
$9,750. It includes rental income of $2,050, and child support payments of $254 that his 
wife receives for one of their children. Their monthly expenses total $6,494, and include 
payments on all debts. (Tr. 28.) They have $900 remaining at the end of the month, 
 
 
 
 
4
which is sufficient to make the $200 payments on the SOR-listed debt and manage any 
other items. (Tr. 33; GE 4.)   
 
 Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation. A chief warrant officer 2, 
who has known Applicant since 1999 and was on active duty with him, submitted a 
character reference letter. In it, he stated that Applicant “is an extremely trustworthy 
person” and someone he would employ if a civilian position became available within his 
criminal investigation division. (AE B.) A retired master sergeant who served with 
Applicant wrote a letter. He does “not believe that [Applicant] would intentionally miss-
represent (sic) himself in anyway. Nor do I believe that [Applicant] lacks the integrity or 
ethical standards required to be placed in a position of trust.” (AE C.) A captain in the 
Marines, who has known Applicant for 12 years and served with him, noted that 
Applicant was selected to serve on a six-month deployment, representing the Marine 
Corps Military Police. She considers Applicant to be a “man of the highest character and 
integrity.” (AE D.) 
  
 Applicant testified candidly and credibly about his financial situation. He 
expressed deep loyalty to the United States and a commitment to pay the delinquent 
debt.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
 
 
 
 
5
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has one large delinquent debt from 2009 that he was unable to begin 
resolving until April 2010. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating 
condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security concerns: 
 
 
 
 
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
AG ¶ 20(a) has some application. Applicant’s large delinquent debt is owed to 
one creditor for building materials he purchased for the construction of his house. The 
debt began accumulating in 2009 as a result of six months of unemployment followed 
by six months of under-employment related to an economic downturn in the 
construction field. Since June 2009, he has been gainfully employed with a federal 
contractor and has begun a repayment plan of the delinquent debt seven months ago, 
diminishing the likelihood that similar problems will recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Similarly, those circumstances 
were beyond his control and warrant a limited application of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant presented evidence to trigger a partial application of AG ¶ 20(c). 
Although he has not participated in financial counseling, he and his wife established a 
solid budget and repayment plan for the delinquent debt. All of his other debts and 
financial obligations are current, further indicating that his financial situation is under 
control. His ongoing payments on the debt since April 2010 demonstrate a good-faith 
effort to resolve and repay the overdue debt, warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(d). 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) or AG ¶ 20(f).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified his June 2009 e-QIP because he 
failed to disclose a delinquent account under three questions listed in Section 26. The 
Government contended that his omissions may raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 16:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information about the delinquent 
account. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has 
the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge 
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
Applicant asserted that he made a mistake when he hurriedly completed the e-
QIP at work and did not have his written material with him and had to telephone his wife 
for information. After listening to his testimony, observing his demeanor, considering his 
military history and familiarity with background investigations, and his disclosure of 
potentially negative information under Section 28, I find that his explanation for the 
omission is credible and that he did not intentionally falsify the e-QIP, but instead made 
a negligent mistake. Hence, the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification. I 
find the disqualifying condition does not apply and this Guideline is found in his favor.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
 
 
8
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 33-year-old mature 
man, who honorably and impressively served this country for four years, during which 
time he held a security clearance. After leaving military service, he and his wife decided 
to build a home, which they could afford based on their income at the time. 
Subsequently, he lost his job for six months and was unable to duplicate his previous 
high salary for another six months, resulting in his inability to make large monthly 
payments on a debt he incurred while constructing his home. For the past seven 
months, he has made payments on the $49,500 delinquent debt in accordance with a 
repayment plan he established with the creditor. Both he and his wife (a credible 
witness) are committed to paying that debt. There is no evidence in the record that 
would lead one to believe that Applicant will not honor his commitment. At this time, the 
delinquent debt no longer poses a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:            For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
