                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 10-00130 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s SOR listed nine unpaid debts, totaling, $22,335. He did not provide 
proof of any payments or other efforts to resolve any of his SOR debts. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86) 
(Item 4). On July 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
(Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On July 19, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and requested a 
decision on the record (Item 3). A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated August 12, 2010, was provided to him on August 18, 2010, and he was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
November 2, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 3) His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a sheet 
metal mechanic.3 He graduated from high school in 1991. He married in 1999 and was 
divorced in January 2004. Applicant has never served in the military. He does not have 
any children. He did not disclose any illegal drug use or alcohol-related offenses on his 
September 22, 2009, SF 86. There is no evidence of security violations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR listed nine unpaid debts, totaling, $22,335, which are as follows: 
1.a judgment ($17,081); 1.b ($15); 1.c ($72); 1.d ($2,160); 1.e ($882); 1.f ($86); 1.g 
($202); 1.h ($289); and 1.i ($1,548).  
 
While Applicant and his spouse were pending divorce, they agreed that he would 
pay off two of his credit cards, and she would relinquish any claim she had on a farm 
they owned.4 He made several payments on the credit cards; however, she did not 
provide the promised release of her interest in the farm. He did not make sufficient 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated August 16, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is dated August 
18, 2010 (file). The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to 
submit information (file).  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SF 86. 
(Item 4)  
 
4Unless dated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is the summary of 
Applicant’s interview on November 3, 2009, by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. 
(Item 5) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
payments to the mortgage on the farm, and he stopped making payments on the two 
credit cards. In 2006, the mortgagor foreclosed; however, there is no evidence of any 
deficiency owed to the mortgagor after the foreclosure. In 2006, Applicant’s spouse 
obtained a judgment against him for $17,081 based on the credit cards he agreed to 
pay. Applicant’s summarized statement to the OPM investigator indicates, “[he] has no 
intent of paying the judgment.” Applicant is current on all of his recent bills. He provides 
$300 per month to his widowed mother. Applicant received financial counseling in 
connection with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which resulted in the discharge of his debts 
in 1999.5 
 
Applicant attributes his delinquent debt to his divorce. (Item 5) He concedes he 
should have been more proactive with his debts. (Item 5) His personal financial 
statement (PFS) showed monthly gross salary of $3,700; monthly net salary of $3,000; 
monthly expenses of $1,890; monthly debt payments of $555; and monthly net 
remainder of $555. (Item 5) His PFS did not list any payments to any of the SOR 
creditors.        
 
Applicant did not submit proof of payments on any of his SOR debts. He has not 
provided copies of any offers to pay his debts, any payment plans, or any 
documentation showing attempts to resolve his debts. He did not provide any 
documentation showing he was maintaining contact with his creditors.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
5The SOR did not allege that Applicant’s debts were discharged through bankruptcy in 1999. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have not considered the non-SOR derogatory information for any purpose in this 
decision because it is remote in time. However, Applicant is credited with receiving financial counseling.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his OPM interview, and his SOR response.  
 
Applicant’s SOR listed nine unpaid debts, totaling $22,335. Some of his debts 
have been delinquent since 2006. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is taking adequate steps to do so.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) has limited applicability. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged 
by insufficient income and his divorce in 2004. However, his financial circumstances 
have been stable for at least a year. There is insufficient evidence that he maintained 
contact with his creditors,6 and there is a paucity of evidence concerning his overall 
financial circumstances over the last five years. There is no documentary evidence that 
he has attempted to pay or settle any of his SOR debts or attempted to establish 
payment plans with his creditors. His documented actions are insufficient to establish he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.     
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not fully apply. Although he received financial counseling in the 
1990s as part of his bankruptcy, he now has nine unpaid SOR debts, totaling $22,335. 
Applicant did not provide a credible plan to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant 
cannot receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because he has not paid, established 
payment plans (by making payments), adequately documented disputes of debts, or 
otherwise resolved any of his SOR debts. There are some initial, positive “indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has admitted some 
responsibility for the SOR debts, showing some good faith mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).7 
 
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant did not provide documentation showing 
he disputed any of his SOR debts.  
  
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has had steady employment for the last 
year. He has $555 left over each month after expenses. He has three SOR debts for 
$15, $72, and $86. However, he did not provide proof of any payments to his SOR 
creditors, or otherwise show sufficient progress on his SOR debts. His documented 
efforts are simply inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 38 years old. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial credit 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
for volunteering to support the U.S. Government, as an employee of a contractor. There 
is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. There is no 
evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. His divorce in 2004 contributed to 
his financial woes. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting responsibility for his 
SOR debts. He is also credited with disclosing his financial problems on his security 
clearance application. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. 
 
The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He did not provide proof of 
any payments of his SOR debts even though he has three debts for $15, $72, and $86. 
The issue of financial considerations was further emphasized when he received the 
SOR, yet he did not make any payments to his creditors. He had ample notice of his 
delinquent SOR debts, and sufficient opportunity to make greater progress in the 
resolution of his SOR debts. He did not pay, start payments, document and justify any 
disputes, or otherwise resolve any SOR debts. He has not made repayment of his 
creditors a high-enough priority. His promises to pay his delinquent debts at some date 
in the future is insufficient to mitigate these debts because there is insufficient evidence 
to explain why he has not done more to address his SOR debts after becoming aware 
that they raised a security concern.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not fully mitigated, and he is not eligible for access to classified 
information at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
