                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00392 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le'i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, Applicant failed to provide 
adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
On May 6, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) to 
obtain a security clearance for her employment with the Department of Defense. (Item 
5) She was granted an interim clearance. On May 6, 2009, Applicant submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for employment with a 
defense contractor. (Item 4) On May 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2010. She admitted all 20 allegations 
under Guideline F of delinquent debt totaling $54,673.49. She elected to have the 
matter decided on the written record. (Item 3) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on August 26, 2010. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on August 30, 2010, and was provided the opportunity to file 
objections, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. She did not provide any additional information in response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on October 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old, divorced with no children, and a college graduate. She 
has been employed as a systems engineer for a defense contractor since December 
2008. Prior to that, she worked as a systems engineer for the Department of Defense 
from April 2005 until October 2007. (Item 4) In a February 22, 2010 Response to 
Interrogatories, Applicant listed her monthly salary as $3,505.02, with monthly expenses 
of $1,782, with a net monthly remainder of $1,280.02. (Item 6 at 5) She also lists some 
periods of unemployment prior to and after working for the Department of Defense. 
(Item 4) 
 
Credit reports (Item 7, credit report, dated July 28, 2010; Item 8, credit report, 
dated April 28, 2010; Item 9 and Item 10, credit reports, dated November 25, 2009; Item 
11, credit report, dated May 15, 2009, and Item 12, credit report, dated August 27, 
2005) show delinquent debts in excess of $54,000. These delinquent accounts include 
credit card debts (SOR 1.a to 1.e, 1.g to 1.k, 1.r to 1.t), and student loans (SOR 1.f and 
1.l to 1.q). 
 
In a May 2009 interview with security investigators, Applicant acknowledged her 
credit card and student loan debts. She stated that most of her non-student loans debts 
arose during her approximately 18 month marriage when she and her husband used 
credit cards to pay for their living expenses. When she left the abusive marriage, she 
was not sure of the amount of their credit card debts. She admitted the student loans 
but did not agree on the amount owed. She noted that she was paying $250 monthly on 
one of the student loans under a payment plan. She did not present any documentation 
about the payment plan or payments made under the plan. In her February 22, 2010 
Response to Interrogatories, she denied knowledge of some of the debts. (Item 6, at 7-
11) However, she admitted all of the debts as listed in the SOR. (Item 3)  
 
In an October 2009 interview with security investigators, Applicant stated she 
contacted some of her creditors to set-up payment plans. She was able to set up three 
payment plans with creditors that were willing to work with her. She claimed she has a 
plan with Midland and Portfolio Collection agencies. She consolidated most of her 
student loans and is paying $260 by automatic deduction on the consolidated loan. She 
 
3 
 
 
has also worked overtime for additional income. Applicant did not present any 
documentation to verify agreed payment plans or payments made on any of her debts. 
(Item 6 at 12-14) 
 
In her February 22, 2010 Response to Interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged 
that she had not contacted nine of her credit card creditors, that she has no knowledge 
of one debt, and is paying one debt. She stated that six of her student loans have been 
consolidated into one loan on which she is making $200 monthly payments. She also 
stated that she is paying $260 a month on another student loan account, that the 
account has been rehabilitated, turned over to another collection agency, and the 
monthly payments reduced. She stated she is current with this account. She stated she 
is paying another account. Applicant presented no documentation to verify payment 
plans, or payments made. She also stated that some accounts may be duplicates of 
other accounts now in collection but presented no information to verify this claim. (Item 
6 at 12-14).  
 
Applicant has failed to present documentation showing she has taken or intends 
to take any action to implement her plan to resolve or pay her delinquent debts. She 
presented no documentation on debt payments. She did state that her plan is to 
concentrate on paying her student loans first, but she did not present any 
documentation to verify the payments she has made on these accounts. She has 
substantial discretionary funds on a monthly basis but provided no information on how 
those funds are utilized or can be or will be utilized to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
Policy 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). The number and nature of the debts, over 20 debts from 
credit cards and student loans, establishes a history and unwillingness to pay debts.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions as required in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The burden shifts to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under 
 
5 
 
 
financial considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separations) and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt during a failed marriage and by using student loans to pursue a college 
degree. There is no indication that the debts incurred during her failed marriage were 
under such circumstances that the debts will not recur. In fact, it appears the debts were 
mutually incurred by Applicant and her husband to cover their cost of living to include 
paying rent, food, and other expenses. The use of student loans to finance an education 
is reasonable and within the control of Applicant. Applicant contacted only some of her 
creditors. She has discretionary funds each month to pay delinquent debts but has not 
indicated that she is acting responsibly to use these funds to resolve her past financial 
obligations. Applicant claims she reached payment plans with some creditors, is paying 
other creditors, and some debts are duplicates. However, she presented no information, 
evidence, or documentation to verify her assertions. Without information from Applicant, 
it cannot be determined her financial problems are being resolved. With evidence of 
delinquent debt and no documentation to support reasonable management of her 
finances, it is obvious that her financial problems are not under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate she received financial 
counseling. Even if she had received counseling, there is no indication her financial 
problems are being resolved or under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. A promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a 
good-faith intention to resolve debts. Applicant has to show a "meaningful track record" 
of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. 
All that is required is a plan to resolve financial problems coupled with significant action 
to implement that plan. She has failed to establish such a meaningful track record. 
 
 Applicant stated she has a plan to pay her debts. However, she has not 
presented adequate evidence to show she implemented her plan. She has sufficient 
 
6 
 
 
income to meet her financial obligations and has two years of steady employment with a 
defense contractor. Applicant's lack of documented action to pay her debts is significant. 
She has not acted reasonably under the circumstances. Based on the delinquent debts 
presented by the Government in credit reports, which she acknowledges, Applicant has 
not acted responsibly towards her debts and finances. Applicant has not presented 
sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not established a 
meaningful track record of paying her delinquent debts. She has not provided sufficient 
credible documentary information to show she acted reasonably and responsibly to 
address her delinquent debts and resolve her financial problems, or even that she has a 
credible plan to resolve and pay her delinquent debts. Applicant has not demonstrated 
responsible management of her finances or a consistent record of actions to resolve 
financial issues. The lack of responsible management of financial obligations indicates 
she may not be concerned or responsible in regard to classified information. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not established her suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial situation. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
