 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07907 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns raised by a 2011 alcohol-related event at work. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the alcohol consumption guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on August 31, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 GE 3. 
 
 
2 
 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on September 13, 2016, and timely submitted a response. The documents 
appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and 
Applicant’s FORM response is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without objection.   
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 59, has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, as an aircraft 
mechanic since August 2009. He was first granted access to classified information in 
1987, during a previous period of employment with his employer between 1987 and 
1999. Applicant’s clearance lapsed between 2001 and 2006, when he owned and 
operated a restaurant franchise. He obtained a security clearance again in 2009 when 
he began his current job, but does not have access to classified information. Applicant 
completed his most recent security clearance application in October 2015 and disclosed 
that in 2011, his employer asked him to seek treatment related to his use of alcohol.3  
 
 Applicant admits that, in November 2011, he tested positive for alcohol at work. 
The record does not contain any information about the events that prompted the test. In 
response to the positive test result, Applicant’s employer issued a final warning notice 
for violating company policy and placed Applicant on a corrective plan administered by 
the employer’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP). The corrective plan included an 
alcohol evaluation, referral to an alcohol-treatment program, and random alcohol testing 
for two years from the date Applicant completed a treatment program.4  
 
 The EAP administrator, a physician, diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent 
and referred him a 30-day, outpatient treatment program. Applicant successfully 
completed the program, during which he was also diagnosed as alcohol dependent by a 
licensed substance abuse counselor. Upon intake, Applicant reported that he was 
consuming 12 to 18 beers daily. At discharge, he was given a good prognosis of 
remaining alcohol free. The discharge instructions recommended, “continuation of a 
twelve-step program, acquiring a sponsor, and working the twelve steps to recovery.”5 
The discharge instructions did not include specific instructions that Applicant remain 
                                                          
3 GE 3 - 4; AE A.  
 
4 GE 6.  
 
5 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
alcohol-free in the future. Applicant attended Alcoholics Anonymous from December 
2012 to May 2013.6  
 
 Between February 2012 and October 2013, Applicant submitted to 15 random 
alcohol screenings as required by his employer. Each test was negative. In May 2012, a 
background investigator interviewed Applicant about his alcohol-consumption habits. 
Applicant began drinking alcohol in social settings as a teenager. Over time, his use 
progressed from drinking in social settings to drinking alone, although he could not 
pinpoint when the change occurred. Applicant acknowledged his drinking became a 
daily, all-day habit. He would not drink to intoxication, but would consume alcohol 
continuously throughout the day.  Applicant admitted having a problem with alcohol until 
he completed the treatment program in December 2011. Applicant stated in his answer 
to the SOR that he appreciated the knowledge he received from the treatment program. 
He reported to the investigator that he had been sober since entering treatment in 
November 2011 and that he did not intend to consume alcohol in the future. 7 
 
 By the time Applicant responded to a set of DOHA interrogatories in February 
2014, he resumed drinking alcohol, consuming two to three beers at a time on a weekly 
basis. He denied drinking to intoxication or before reporting for work. In his May 2016 
SOR answer, Applicant admitted that he continued to consume alcohol, but he did not 
do so daily or a “need-to-have basis,” but on weekends, vacations, and family 
gatherings. Despite his 2011 alcohol dependent diagnosis, Applicant does not believe 
that he is a chronic alcohol abuser and considers himself a reliable and trustworthy 
employee. Since the 2011 incident, Applicant has received multiple awards from his 
employer for his performance, and there is no evidence of any other alcohol-related 
incidents.8 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
6 GE 5-7.  
 
7 GE 4, 7. 
 
8 GE 3, 5.  
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. The record establishes a prima facie case 
under the alcohol consumption guideline. During his background investigation, Applicant 
reported alcohol-consumption habits indicating that at in at least 2011, he habitually 
consumed alcohol to impaired judgement, culminating in his reporting to work under the 
influence of alcohol. Because of this incident, Applicant submitted to alcohol evaluations 
from his employer’s EAP administrator and the alcohol-treatment program he attended. 
Both evaluations determined that Applicant had an alcohol use disorder.9  
 
 Applicant receives partial mitigation under AG ¶¶ 23(b) and (d) for acknowledging 
that his pattern of maladaptive use of alcohol, completing an alcohol treatment program, 
following through on the aftercare recommendations, and satisfying the terms of his 
                                                          
9 AG ¶¶ 22 (b) – (d). 
 
5 
 
employer’s corrective plan. Neither mitigating condition fully applies because Applicant 
resumed his alcohol consumption, albeit on a modified level, and it is not clear from the 
record whether any level of alcohol consumption is appropriate given his alcohol use 
disorder diagnosis.  
 
 After a review of the records, I have no reservations about Applicant’s ongoing 
security worthiness. Considering Applicant’s completion of a treatment program and his 
satisfactory completion of his employer’s corrective plan with the whole-person 
considerations in AG ¶ 2(d),  the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns raised by the 2011 incident and Applicant’s history of alcohol 
consumption. Applicant has held a security clearance for over 20 years. During that 
time, he has had one alcohol-related incident. He has no alcohol-related criminal 
history. There is no evidence to indicate that the 2011 positive alcohol test was more 
than an isolated incident. Since the 2011 incident, Applicant has received recognition 
and performance awards from his employer. Although Applicant continues to consume 
alcohol, he has established a pattern of modified consumption and there does not 
appear to be an ongoing problem that calls into question his current judgment, reliability, 
or ability to properly handle and safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
