 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07947 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Sober four years, 
Applicant has mitigated concerns raised by his alcohol use disorder and history of 
alcohol-related criminal conduct. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the  alcohol consumption and criminal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on July 26, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on September 20, 2016. He did not respond. Given the age of this case, I 
reopened the record to allow the parties to submit updated information. Applicant timely 
submitted a response. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, Applicant’s submission is admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, without objection.   
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 55, has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, since August 
2006. He has held a security clearance since at least 2005. Applicant retired from 
twenty years of active duty military service in 2006. He completed his most recent 
security clearance application in January 2015, disclosing five arrests.3  
 
 Based on Applicant’s disclosures and the information from his background 
investigation, the SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in 2002 for assault and 
resisting arrest and in 2008 for driving with a suspended license. Applicant’s alcohol use 
was a factor in both arrests. The SOR also alleges that Applicant was arrested in 2007, 
2010, and 2013 for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). During the 2013 arrest, 
Applicant was also charged with driving on a suspended or revoked license and an 
ignition interlock violation. He admits each of the SOR allegations.4  
 
 Applicant pleaded guilty to each of the alleged criminal charges. After the 2007 
DUI conviction, Applicant completed a court-ordered alcohol assessment. He was 
diagnosed with alcohol abuse, but was not ordered to attend further treatment. After the 
2010 conviction, the court sentenced Applicant to 20 days in jail, imposed five years of 
unsupervised probation, ordered Applicant to attend a six-month, outpatient alcohol 
treatment program for alcohol abuse, and ordered Applicant to attend Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA). He completed the terms of his sentence.5 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 1-2, 4, 6.  
 
5 GE 1-3. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant remained sober until the November 2013 DUI, which occurred days 
after his wife of 25 years died after a brief illness. He received deferred adjudication for 
the incident. Under the terms of the deferred adjudication agreement, Applicant agreed 
to complete a two-year alcohol treatment program, attend AA meetings twice each 
week, and pay court costs. Upon completion of the requirements and five years without 
any additional criminal incidents, the court agreed to dismiss the DUI charges. Applicant 
completed the court-ordered treatment program in February 2016. He then began 
participating in a 36-month after-care program. Applicant is in compliance with the 
licensing, insurance, and interlock device requirements of his sentence.6  
 
Applicant admits that he has an alcohol use disorder. He acknowledges that he 
made bad choices about his use of alcohol after separating from the military and after 
the death of his wife. Applicant’s employer is aware of his alcohol problem and related 
criminal issues, including his deferred adjudication status. According to Applicant’s 
supervisor, Applicant is a well-respected employee and member of the workplace 
community. Applicant has been sober for four years. He continues to attend AA on a 
weekly basis and he regularly attends sober lifestyle events.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
6 GE 1; AE B, D-G. 
 
7 GE 1; AE A, C.  
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individuals 
reliability and trustworthiness. The record establishes the Government’s prima facie 
case.  Applicant admits to involvement in five alcohol-related incidents away from work. 
However, only the three DUI arrests in 2007, 2010, and 2013, which resulted in two 
convictions and one deferred adjudication were alleged under this guideline.8 
Applicant’s DUI arrests are also disqualifying as evidence of habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.9  
 
 Applicant has presented sufficient information to mitigate alcohol consumption 
concerns. He has acknowledged his alcohol use disorder and the negative impact it has 
had on his personal life. Although Applicant relapsed after completing a court-ordered 
treatment program in 2010, he did so after the sudden death of his wife in 2013. 
Applicant has been sober since that one-time lapse four years ago. Applicant has since 
completed a second treatment program. He continues to engage in sobriety 
management programs, including AA and sober lifestyle social events.10 He is actively 
managing his alcohol-use disorder and it seems to be under control.  
 
 
Criminal Conduct 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 22(a). 
 
9 AG ¶22(c).  
 
10 AG ¶¶ 23(b) and (d).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s “criminal activity creates doubt about [his] judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness [because] it calls into question his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules and regulations.”11 Applicant has been arrested five times between 2002 and 
2013, resulting in three convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol.12 He is 
currently under court supervision in a deferred adjudication program.13  
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct is related to his alcohol use disorder. Sober four 
years and actively engaged in a sobriety management program, Applicant has 
demonstrated rehabilitation and reform.14 Although he remains under court supervision, 
he has completed all the terms of his sentence and is in compliance with the licensing, 
insurance, and driving restrictions. Despite his legal troubles, Applicant has remained in 
good standing with his employer who reports that Applicant’s alcohol issues have not 
negatively affected his work performance.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Applicant has mitigated the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct concerns 
regarding his continued security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s history of alcohol 
dependency and his associated criminal record is extensive. He does not minimize the 
seriousness or extent of his problem. Given the nature of alcohol use disorder, it is 
impossible to predict whether or not an individual will relapse, but in this case Applicant 
has an effective support network and made positive lifestyle changes, which decreases 
the likelihood of recurrence.  
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 30. 
 
12 AG ¶ 31(b). 
 
13 AG ¶ 31(c).  
 
14 AG ¶ 32(d).  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
