1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]   )  ISCR Case No. 15-02005 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was initially taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017. 
  
 On March 27, 2018, Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an 
expedited hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed in April 2018. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2018. On that same 
date, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for May 2, 2018.  
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
During the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits, which were admitted without 
objection as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 and 2. Applicant offered five exhibits, which 
were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – E,  without objection. The Government 
requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts regarding the country of 
Afghanistan. The administrative notice document was marked as Administrative Notice I 
2 
 
(Admin Not I). The transcript was received on May 9, 2018. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Administrative Notice  -  Afghanistan1  
 
 Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic with a directly elected president, a bicameral 
legislative branch, and a judicial branch. Afghanistan remains an important partner with 
the United States against terrorism. Afghanistan works with the U.S. to eliminate the 
remnants of al-Qaeda and its affiliates. The U.S. continues to invest U.S. resources to 
help Afghanistan improve its security, governance, institutions and economy. The 
United States’ strong bilateral relationship with Afghanistan is guided by the Enduring 
Strategic Partnership Agreement (SPA) between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan 
and the United States signed in May 2012, which lays out respective economic and 
political commitments, as well as by the Bilateral Security Agreement signed in 
September 2014, which lays out mutual security understandings. In July 2012, following 
the country’s entry into the SPA, President Obama designated Afghanistan a Major 
Non-NATO ally.  
 
 The U.S. has engaged in Afghanistan since 2001. There has been a drawdown 
in the number of troops in Afghanistan. The troops are there to train the Afghan forces 
to become more effective, professional, and sustainable. U.S. forces continue to disrupt 
and degrade al-Qaeda and Islamic State activities in Afghanistan through partnered 
operations with Afghan forces, as well as unilateral operations. The U.S. makes it a 
priority to ensure that Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terrorism.   
 
 The U.S. Department of State issued a travel advisory warning U.S. citizens not 
travel to Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist 
organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe 
because of the ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, suicide bombings, 
widespread military combat operations, landmines, terrorist and insurgent attacks, 
including attacks using vehicle-borne or other improvised explosive devices (IEDS). 
Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. government convoys and compounds, 
foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas.  
 
 Afghanistan also has significant human rights problems to include extrajudicial 
killings by security forces; ineffective government investigations of abuse and torture by 
local security forces; poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention; judicial 
corruption and ineffectiveness; violations of privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of 
speech, press, religion, and movement; pervasive governmental corruption; underage 
and forced marriages; abuse of children; trafficking in persons including forced labor; 
discrimination against persons with disabilities; discrimination and abuses against ethnic 
minorities; societal discrimination based on race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, 
and HIV/AIDS status; and abuse of workers’ rights, including child labor. 
 
                                                          
1 Admin Not I (Administrative Notice filing on Afghanistan and supporting documents) 
3 
 
 Widespread disregard for the rule of law and official impunity for those who 
committed human rights abuses were serious problems. The government did not 
consistently or effectively prosecute abuses by officials, including security forces.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant is a 34-year-old linguist who is an employee of a Department of 
Defense contractor since 2009. He currently works in Afghanistan. He is applying for a 
security clearance. Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He graduate from high school in 
Afghanistan. He moved to United States in 2008. He became a U.S. citizen on May 8, 
2013. He married in September 2007. His wife is a citizen of Afghanistan, but is a 
permanent resident of the United States. They have two sons, ages eight and sixteen 
months. Both children were born in the United States. (Tr. 23 - 31; Gov 1; Answer to 
SOR) (Note: The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names 
of witnesses, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited 
sources contain more specific information.)  
  
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. He has two older sisters and two 
younger brothers. In 2004, while an Afghan citizen, Applicant was hired to work as a 
linguist in support of American military operations in Afghanistan. He initially worked for 
the U.S. Marine Corps in Helmand province for six months. During this time, they 
encountered a lot of engagement with the enemy and insurgents. He then worked for 
U.S. Special Forces in Kabul. The mission was to advise and provide mentorship to 
Afghan commando forces. (Tr. 27)  Applicant received high praise for his support as a 
linguist. (AE C at 9, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22-25, 27.)  
 
On January 31, 2007, Major General B. F., recommended Applicant for selection 
for as an immigrant to the United States under Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) status for 
his dedicated service supporting Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF) – 76, supporting 
Operation Enduring Freedom. He noted Applicant served an interpreter in the Public 
Affairs Office for over two years. Applicant contributed significantly to the Public Affairs 
Office’s ability to effectively communicate the CJTF story to the Afghan people. (AE C at 
28) In 2008, Applicant was granted SIV status and moved to the United States. When 
he became a U.S. citizen in 2013, he renounced his Afghani citizenship and 
surrendered his Afghani passport. (Tr. 24, 27-28, Gov 1; Response to SOR) 
 
Applicant married his wife in Afghanistan in 2007. She came to the United States 
in 2008 and is a permanent resident of the U.S. She needs to learn English in order to 
pass her citizenship test. When he first moved to the U.S., Applicant served as a role 
player and cultural advisor at an Army installation. It was a temporary job. The training 
was held five to six times a year, lasting two to three weeks at a time. Applicant was 
unemployed between courses. After his temporary job ended, he worked as a pizza 
delivery driver for about five months. In 2009, he was hired to be a linguist by his current 
employer. He works overseas in Afghanistan. (Tr. 26, 27) 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s two brothers also worked as linguists supporting the U.S. military 
operation in Afghanistan. One brother is 29. He lives in the United States. Applicant and 
his family live with this brother when they are in the United States. His brother owns the 
house.  His brother immigrated the U.S. with a SIV in 2008. He is now a U.S. citizen and 
works in the U.S. as a linquist–analyst for another DoD contractor. (Tr. 39-40)  
Applicant’s other brother is 26. He also lives in the house. He is single and worked as 
an IT administrator for a DoD contractor. He became a permanent U.S. resident on 
November 13, 2012. He applied for U.S. citizenship and is waiting for the approval of 
the application. He also previously worked as a linguist supporting the U.S. military in 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 43-45; AE D)   
 
Applicant’s parents and two sisters are citizens of and reside in Afghanistan. His 
father is a retired high school teacher. His mother was a housewife. His father was 
recently diagnosed with ALS. His mother has high blood pressure and stomach issues. 
Applicant sponsored his parents to immigrate to the United States.  They received their 
visas in April 2017 and moved to the United States on May 11, 2018, about a week after 
the hearing.  One of Applicant’s sisters has mental health issues and does not work. 
She lived with their parents in Afghanistan. When Applicant’s parents moved to the 
United States, she now lives with Applicant’s other sister. His other sister is married and 
has several children. Her husband is an anesthesiologist.  None of his family has 
contacts or work for the government of Afghanistan. (Tr. 33-38)  
 
Applicant’s younger brother recently traveled back to Afghanistan to visit and to 
help his parents with their immigration paperwork. He traveled back to the United States 
with Applicant’s parents on May 11, 2018. Applicant’s parents intend to move to the 
United States permanently. His father is deeding the house to his daughter and her 
family. They will move into his parents’ house and take care of Applicant’s sister with 
mental health issues. (Tr. 43-44, 55) 
 
From November 2010 to approximately December 2017, Applicant sent 
approximately $240,000 in financial support to his parents in Afghanistan.  At hearing, 
Applicant explained that when he would travel to Afghanistan for work, his wife and son 
would travel to Afghanistan and stay with Applicant’s parents.  She was lonely in the 
United States and preferred to stay with his family while he was working in Afghanistan.  
The money Applicant sent paid for renovations and an addition on his parents’ house to 
make it more comfortable for his wife and children to also reside there. He would 
deposit money in his wife’s checking account with a U.S. bank. His wife would withdraw 
the money in increments from an automated teller machine (ATM) while she was in 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s wife also purchased some expensive jewelry and some 
expensive hand woven silk rugs for their home in the United States. (Tr. 52-54;                
Gov 2) 
 
 Since his parents are immigrating to the United States. Applicant’s wife will not 
be traveling to Afghanistan while Applicant is deployed on his mission in Afghanistan. 
Applicant will no longer send money to Afghanistan because his parents and family are 
now in the United States. His oldest son had a private tutor when they lived in 
Afghanistan. He currently attends the public school in the United States. (Tr. 30-33, 54) 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and seven brothers-in-law are citizens of and reside in 
Afghanistan. His father-in-law passed away a few years ago.  His wife calls her mother 
about once a week. Applicant’s brothers-in-law own grocery stores. Applicant has 
minimal contact with his brothers-in-law. His wife’s relatives have never traveled to the 
United States to visit Applicant and his family. Applicant’s wife does not intend to travel 
back to Afghanistan, but will likely travel to Afghanistan if her mother passes away. (Tr. 
50-52, 57-58)  
 
 Applicant purchased a home in the United States near the area where he resides 
with his family while in the United States. He purchased the house for $340,000. He has 
about $16,000 left on the mortgage. The house is currently worth about $400,000. 
Applicant rents the property. He has no investments outside of the United States to 
include in Afghanistan. All of his assets are located in the United States. (Tr. 40-41, 55-
56)  
 
Applicant is very proud of his service as a linguist/culture adviser in support of 
the U.S. military in Afghanistan. He is very proud to be a U.S. citizen.  
   
Whole-Person Factors  
 
 Colonel N., the current Commanding Officer of the Special Operations Advisory 
Group, NATO Special Operations Component Command, strongly recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance. He has worked with Applicant over the past twelve 
months. Applicant served as the groups’ linguist and interpreter. Applicant was 
entrusted with very sensitive information. He provided simultaneous translations of 
unclassified intelligence and operational briefings, interpreted time-sensitive military 
documents and agreements and served as the de facto cultural advisor. Applicant has 
proven himself to be a man of integrity, loyal, and 100% dedicated to the interests of the 
U.S. government. His work product is superior and he has never violated OPSEC 
protocols. Applicant’s “impeccable performance of duty, high level of efficiency, 
unquestionable allegiance to the U.S. Government, and outstanding results provided in 
the most complex of assignments highly distinguished him from among his peers.”  
Applicant has earned their trust, respect, and confidence. (AE C at 1)  
 
Colonel P., the previous Commanding Officer of the Special Operations Advisory 
Group, selected Applicant among 140 interpreters to be the command interpreter. He 
describes Applicant as “the single best linguist, I have worked with (in over 22 years of 
working with foreign partners and over two years in Afghanistan).”  In addition to serving 
as a linguist, Applicant tactfully guides coalition and Afghan partners into the “right 
places” in interpersonal interactions, ensuring smooth communications. Applicant has 
earned the deep trust of Afghan Senior General Officers as well as Coalition General 
Flag Officers, diplomat, and VIPs.  Colonel P. states Applicant is a man of high 
character and integrity. He would trust him with the life and care of his family. Applicant 
is the type of teammate everyone wants: “high expertise, high trust, high impact on the 
mission.”  (AE C at 2)  
 
Applicant has received several Certificates of Appreciation, military coins, and 
other favorable reference letters stating highly favorable things about him and about his 
6 
 
skills as a linguist interpreter in support of U.S. military operations in Afghanistan. (AE C 
at 3 – 28)  
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE B: Foreign Influence 
 
   AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are applicable to Applicant’s case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign  country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation, or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 7(a), AG ¶ 7(b), and AG ¶ 7(f) apply. The mere 
possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign 
country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise 
of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant’s parents, two sisters and 
brother are citizens of Afghanistan.  At the time the SOR was issued, Applicant’s 
parents and sisters resided in Afghanistan. This creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of Afghanistan’s 
instability, serious human rights problems, and issues with terrorism. The government of 
8 
 
Afghanistan has made some progress, but a heightened risk remains. Applicant’s 
contacts with his family in Afghanistan also creates a potential conflict of interest 
between his obligation to protect classified information and his desire to help his family 
members by providing that information.  
 
AG ¶ 7(f) applies because Applicant sent a significant amount of money to 
Afghanistan, most of the money was used to remodel his parents’ house.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(f) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. 
The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in an conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
  
 I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies to Applicant’s case. It is clear that Applicant has ties of 
affection and obligation to his family members in Afghanistan. However, it is unlikely 
Applicant will have to choose between the interests of his relatives in Afghanistan and 
the interests of the United States. Applicant has served as a linguist in Afghanistan for 
over a 13-year-period. He is known for protecting sensitive information. He took 
precautions while working in Afghanistan to never visit his family. His parents have 
since moved to the United States. His brother who is a permanent resident of the United 
States traveled back to Afghanistan to assist in their parents move. He has now 
returned to the United States. Applicant’s two sisters, his sister’s family, and his wife’s 
family members still reside in Afghanistan.      
  
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has deep and longstanding ties in the 
United States. Applicant moved to the United States in 2008 on a SIV.  He has served 
as a linguist supporting the US military operation since 2004. He became a U.S. citizen 
9 
 
in May 2013. His wife is a permanent U.S. resident and his two sons were born in the 
United States. While his family traveled and lived in Afghanistan in the past while 
Applicant was working as a linguist, they now are living in the United States. His oldest 
son now attends a U.S. school. Applicant and one of his brothers are citizens of and 
reside in the United States. Both of his brothers previously served as linguists in 
Afghanistan supporting US military operations. One of his brothers currently works as a 
linguist for a DoD contractor in the United States. Applicant and his brothers have 
worked in support of U.S. forces since 2004. He has worked alongside U.S. forces 
under austere combat conditions. In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 
2006), the Appeal Board discussed this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
I considered Applicant’s longstanding commitment to the United States as well as 
his favorable contributions to national security. I find that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is 
applicable.  
AG ¶ 8(f) applies with regards to the money Applicant sent to Afghanistan. While 
the amount was significant it was used to remodel his parents’ home to accommodate 
his wife and children while they resided at the home. His parents and his wife and 
children now reside in the United States. His father is transferring the home he owns in 
Afghanistan  
to Applicant’s sister. Applicant agrees with his father’s decision. His wife also 
used a large portion of the money to purchase jewelry and carpets which she has 
brought to the United States. All of Applicant’s current property and investments are 
located in the United States.  He purchased a home and is close to paying off the 
mortgage. He no longer has any financial interests in Afghanistan. 
The security concerns under Foreign Influence are mitigated.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant and his two  
brothers served as linguists in support of the U.S. military mission in Afghanistan since 
2004 at risk to their safety. Applicant has lived in the United States since 2008. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2013.  He currently serves as an interpreter in Afghanistan.  
His wife is a permanent resident who lives in the United States with his two children. He 
is sponsoring his parents immigration to the United States and they arrived in the United 
States in May 2018.     
 
I considered Applicant’s outstanding record as a linguist working on sensitive  
projects that were vital to U.S. national security. He received high praise from several 
U.S. military officers who attest to his dedication to the mission as well as his 
trustworthiness. The foreign influence security concerns are mitigated.     
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the U.S. to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
