 
 
 
 
1 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07154 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
      For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On August 8, 2016, Applicant 
responded to the SOR, addressed the three allegations, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I 
was assigned the case on March 28, 2017. The matter was scheduled on May 24, 
2017, for a July 27, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony and 
offered 20 documents, accepted without objection as Exs. A-T. The record was left 
open through August 22, 2017, to provide the parties with sufficient time to submit 
additional materials. In the interim, a transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on 
August 4, 2017. On August 21, 2017, Applicant submitted 10 additional documents. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG have been 
amended. The present AG, applied here, are in effect for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
After review by the Government, they were admitted without objection as Exs. U-DD. 
The record was closed on August 22, 2017. After review of the record as a whole, I find 
that Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old senior systems architect engineer and business owner. 
He has been an employee of his business since 2006. First granted a security 
clearance in about 1986, he has maintained his present security clearance since 2004. 
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree from a major university. Applicant’s wife is a 
homemaker. The couple has one pre-teen child. Applicant has maintained the services 
of an accountant since 2005, and he has received financial counseling. (Ex. C) 
Recommendations from friends and professional peers are all highly favorable. (Ex. H) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant met his future wife. Their romantic relationship progressed 
quickly. As the woman was a foreign national, Applicant prepared                                                                                           
multiple forms and reviewed much paperwork trying to get her a fiancée visa, while 
arranging for a wedding abroad. (Tr. 24) This involved multiple trips between their two 
countries. Ultimately, the couple married in the United States in February 2017. A child 
was born the following month. Unfortunately, this all occurred during a short period of 
time during which Applicant had chosen to do his own federal and state taxes. Because 
of all the “huge life changes that were going on at the time,” Applicant failed to timely file 
his income tax returns for TY 2006-2007 or to seek aid from his accountant. (Tr. 24, 43-
44) Although he did timely request extensions for filing his various tax returns, he failed 
to submit them within six months of the regular due date. (Tr. 25; Ex. DD)  
 
 During a 2015 interview related to this process, Applicant self-reported his failure 
to file state and federal income tax returns for tax years (TY) 2006 and 2007. In June 
2017, Applicant, through his accountant, filed his TY 2006 federal and state tax returns, 
both business and personal.2 (Tr. 22-23; Exs. K, M, N, and O) At the same time, he 
similarly filed his federal and state business and personal income tax returns for TY 
2007.3 (Tr. 22; Exs. L, N, and P-Q) With those filings, Applicant paid modest sums to his 
state, while considerable refunds he would have otherwise have received for 
overpayment were barred because his filings were too late. (Tr. 17, 23, 38-39)  
 
At the time, Applicant was unaware that his failure to timely file tax returns could 
jeopardize his security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 25-26) Applicant’s accountants have 
since checked to assure that all his taxes have been paid and they have reviewed his 
past returns.4 (See, e.g., Exs. V, X, and Y) Applicant now fully understands the 
                                                          
2 Applicant overpaid toward his TY 2006 federal personal income tax by approximately $23,000. (Tr. 23) 
 
3 Applicant’s accountant was working on the TY 2006-2007 returns when the SOR was issued. (Tr. 32) 
 
4 Contrary to the SOR, there is no evidence Applicant had an outstanding debt amounting to $60,000 
owed to the federal taxing authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
importance of timely filing one’s income tax returns. (Tr. 46) Making sure tax returns are 
timely filed is now a priority for him. (Tr. 46-47) He intends to let professionals 
exclusively file his tax returns in the future. (Tr. 51) Applicant has offered a statement of 
intent indicating that he will automatically forfeit any security clearance granted should 
he ever again file his tax returns late. (Tr. 18; Ex. B) 
 
 Before these issues arose, Applicant had only been involved in one incident that 
potentially raised security concerns. Several years earlier, Applicant had been working 
in a classified lab. He later found an unmarked CD-ROM in his briefcase. He did not put 
it in the briefcase and he did not know its origin. Applicant immediately reported the 
incident to his superior and tendered the CD-ROM for appropriately handling. The 
individual to whom he reported this incident highly recommends Applicant for a security 
clearance, noting Applicant’s honesty, trustworthiness, reliability, and candor. (Ex. R)  
 
 While on travel in 2010, Applicant got a telephone call from a cable television 
company saying that boxes had been left on his porch for him to return its equipment. 
Applicant was confused, as he had never used this company or its services. (Tr. 19-20) 
This was his first indication that he was a victim of identity theft.5 Once he discovered 
this, he filed a police report. (Ex. D) That report fully documented the reporting of the 
incident and the initial efforts by the police. Applicant informed the cable provider that he 
had reported the matter to the police. The company “basically said, okay, [and] they 
wrote it off as mistaken identity or identity fraud.” (Tr. 21) Applicant believed the 
company would be having the incorrect entry removed from his credit report. (Tr. 21)  
 
 Today, Applicant is in good financial shape. He has around $5,000 available in 
the bank and a retirement account with a balance of approximately $15,000. He and his 
spouse have about a $50,000 share in a property located in her former country of 
residence. (Tr. 49) Applicant owns his residential home, in which he has about 
$150,000 in equity, and a smaller property he purchased from his father, which has a 
value of $10,000. He typically has a net monthly remainder after all expenses. His only 
large purchase in the past five years was a used automobile. He is able to meet his 
monthly obligations without difficulty.  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). The AG list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. They are applied in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the 
                                                          
5 In addition, according to Applicant’s December 2014 credit report, the account was suspiciously opened 
after the date of last activity on the account. (Ex. 2 at 5)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
AG, the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of variables known as the “whole-
person concept,” under which all available, reliable information must be considered.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts. An 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate admitted facts or facts proven by the Government, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends normal 
duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard such 
information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant 
failed to timely file both federal and state income taxes for TY 2006 and TY 2007, owed 
a balance to the federal government for those tax years, and had a $582 delinquent 
debt owed to a telecommunications provider. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Under these facts, five conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
           Applicant was sidetracked from timely filing his federal and state income tax 
returns for TY 2006 and 2007 due to an international, whirlwind romance that began 
sometime in early or mid-2006. In short order, Applicant dated, fell in love, proposed, 
and began flying back and forth to his fiancée’s country as part of their courtship. At the 
same time, he was keeping up with his office work, applying to the appropriate U.S. 
authorities for a visa and related paperwork for his intended, planning a foreign 
wedding, preparing for a domestic wedding, and ultimately getting married in the United 
States. A month later, Applicant’s child was born, topping a highly busy year.  
 
           In spite of all these activities, Applicant still remembered to submit the appropriate 
paperwork asking for an extension to file his tax returns. Although he tarried in 
ultimately filing those returns, his tax return issues are limited to just that one, isolated 
period (2006-2007). Moreover, while this scenario may not be highly unusual in terms of 
his romance, the geography and haste involved was rather out of the ordinary. As the 
more seasoned Applicant of today is unlikely to repeat such events or circumstances, 
sufficient facts exist to give rise to AG ¶ 20(a). On the other hand, the situation was not 
out of Applicant’s control, obviating application of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
           As for the belated tax returns, Applicant, to his credit, requested an extension to 
submit them. Such a request, however, does not give one an unlimited time to then 
 
 
 
 
6 
submit the required filings. Here, Applicant either forgot or procrastinated in having the 
returns completed for about a decade. This poses an extreme example of oversight, if 
not negligence, that raises significant security concerns.  
 
           However, Applicant finally saw fit – before the issuance of the SOR – to start the 
process with his accountant to take corrective action. While barred from collecting 
refund monies owed to him due to the lateness of his submissions, Applicant has shown 
that the federal and state tax returns at issue have been filed, all appropriate tax funds 
paid, and the situation resolved with the relevant taxing authorities. In light of these 
facts, AG ¶ 20(g) applies. Overall, Applicant is otherwise financially responsible, living 
within his means, and has received financial counseling. He is committed to leaving his 
taxes in the more responsible hands of his accountant. When all this is taken in 
conjunction with the swift action he took reporting the suspicious entry on his credit 
report, AG ¶ 20(c)-(d) are also raised. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
          Applicant is a 54-year-old senior systems architect engineer and business owner 
who has been associated with his present company for about a dozen years. He was 
first granted a security clearance in about 1986, and he has maintained his present 
security clearance since 2004. According to his former superior, Applicant’s only 
involvement with a dubious security incident, the case involving a suspicious CD-ROM, 
resulted in a display of proper and professional handling by Applicant. A married college 
graduate and father of one child, Applicant has received financial counseling. 
 
 Applicant has retained an accountant for over a dozen years to assist him with 
his financial matters. In 2006-2007, when he quickly went from bachelor to married man 
and father, however, he was in the middle of an aberrant period during which he had 
decided to handle his own federal and state income tax returns. While he remembered 
to file for an extension with regard to the filing of his tax returns, he failed to follow 
through and complete them in a timely matter.  
 
A decade later, just prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant sought review of 
his tax issues by a professional. He then instructed his accountant to file the forgotten 
tax returns. They have since been filed, outstanding taxes were paid, and, to his 
detriment, he found his filings to be too late for him to receive what would otherwise 
have been a considerable refund. Since then, he has tasked his accountant with 
reviewing his entire tax return situation and attending to any issues. Applicant now fully 
 
 
 
 
7 
appreciates the importance of filing his returns in a timely manner, and he has wisely 
chosen to have such matters in the future handled exclusively by an accounting 
professional. 
 
 As for the $582 delinquent debt noted on his credit report, that entry, on its face, 
is irregular. It notes a date of last activity that precedes the date the account was 
supposedly opened. When Applicant first heard that the telecommunications entity 
considered him to be a customer, he called it directly, corrected the matter, and then 
reported the situation to the police as a case of identity theft. A formal police report was 
promptly completed, and Applicant expects his credit report to soon be amended. If not, 
he has received financial counseling and knows to immediately seek the entry’s deletion 
by disputing the error with one of the three major credit reporting bureaus.  
 
 Timely filing of one’s federal and state income taxes is a fundamental 
requirement for an individual entrusted with a security clearance. Here, Applicant’s 
issues were isolated to a two-year period many years ago. Such issues have not 
recurred in nearly a dozen years. Applicant now fully appreciates the importance of this 
annual requirement and will not again fail to file all necessary paperwork in a timely 
fashion. This is his only security failure after many years of maintaining a security 
clearance. Today, his focus is directed toward his responsibilities, and not the whirlwind 
excitement of romance. Given what he has learned and experienced, I find it unlikely he 
will again neglect his tax responsibilities. Therefore, I find Applicant has mitigated 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
