  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      ) ISCR Case No. 15-05102 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information and 
documents to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. He was interviewed by a security investigator from the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) on November 27, 2012 (PSI). After reviewing the 
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to grant a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated January 25, 2016, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
  2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2016. He admitted seven (SOR 
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h) and denied two (SOR 1.d and1.i) of the allegations of 
delinquent debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 12, 2018, 
and I was assigned the case of January 17, 2018. DOD issued a notice of hearing on 
January 30, 2018, for a hearing on February 21, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government’s four exhibits (GX 1-4) were admitted into the record 
without objection. Applicant testified, and introduced three exhibits (AX A-C) that were 
admitted into the record without objection. I left the record open for Applicant to submit 
additional documents. Applicant did not submit any additional documents. I received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 1, 2018.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and were 
effective on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant was advised at the hearing that the summary of the PSI (AX 2) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and he could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the summary. Applicant did not raise any objection 
to consideration of the information in the PSI. I will consider information in the PSI in my 
decision. (Tr. 13-14) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 46 years old. He has never married and has no 
children. He received his high school diploma in June 1989, a bachelor’s degree in 
business management in July 1994, and a Master’s Degree in information technology in 
May 2016. Applicant was employed as a systems administrator by a private business 
from June 1999 until February 2009 when he was laid off. He was unemployed until 
October 2009 when he found employment in the information technology (IT) field for the 
United States Court system. He was terminated from his position in the court system in 
July 2010 and was unemployed until October 2010 but he did work for various 
                                            
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 
AGs. My decision would be the same under both AGs. 
  3 
 
government contractors on different IT contracts until he went to work in business 
support for a defense-contractor shipyard in February 2012. From October 2009 to 
February 2012, he experienced small periods of unemployment when the contracts he 
worked on were completed. He was also terminated from one Government agency 
because he was not granted a security clearance for that agency.  
 
He earned his Master’s degree in May 2016 while working for the shipyard 
defense contractor. Applicant presented his latest performance reviews that show he 
consistently provides good service to his client, and that he is professional, responsible, 
and a team player. (Tr. 10-20; GX 1, e-QIP, dated June 8, 2012; GX 2, PSI, dated 
November 27, 2012, at 2-4; AX A, Master’s Degree transcript, dated May 17, 2016; AX 
C, Performance Evaluations) 
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (GX 3, dated December 28, 2015; GX 4, dated 
February 21, 2018) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a state income 
tax debt for $5,900 (SOR 1.a); judgments for the same homeowner’s association for 
$9,651 (SOR 1.b), and $730 (SOR 1.c), and $730 (SOR 1.i); an account more than 120 
days past due for $11,761 (SOR 1.d); an account charged off for $10,632 (SOR 1.e); an 
account placed for collection for $1,084 (SOR 1.f); an account placed for collection for 
$699 (SOR 1.g) and a television service contract placed for collection for $214 (SOR 
1.h). The total amount of the credit card debt is approximately $41,000. Applicant also 
admitted to owing other debts, including federal income tax and student loans, not listed 
in the SOR. (GX 2, PSI, at 5-7) 
 
Applicant stated that his financial problems started in 2009 when he was laid off 
from a job he had for ten years. He then went from job to job before finding steady 
employment at his present position. He incurred debt from 2009 until 2012 through 
unemployment and underemployment, leaving him with little if any income during this 
time. He was mainly supported by his parents. He does not make as much income in 
his present job as he did in 2009. In 2009, his yearly pay was $87,411. When he started 
working to the shipyard in 2012, his yearly pay was $68,000. His pay has increased, 
and his yearly pay is now $76,725. (Tr. 18-20) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.a is for state income taxes owed for tax year 2008. At the 
time the taxes were due, he simply did not have sufficient funds to pay the taxes. He 
made small payments on taxes from 2009 until 2012. In early 2016, he contacted the 
state tax authorities and made payment arrangements. He did not make the payments. 
In October 2017, he need vehicle transportation, so he had to reregister his car and 
obtain car insurance. He took advantage of an amnesty program offered by the state. 
He paid $1,000 for taxes owed, registered his vehicle, had the car inspected, and 
obtained insurance. Supposedly, the state then forgave the remaining amount that was 
owed to them by Applicant. He has not made any other payments to the state. Applicant 
did not provide any documentation or receipts to verify his claim of payments and 
receiving amnesty for the taxes owed. (Tr. 21-30) 
 
  4 
 
The debts at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.i are for homeowner association fees. The 
debts at SOR 1.c and 1.i are duplicate debts, and they are incorporated into the 
judgment entered in 2014 as referenced at SOR 1.b. Applicant did not have the funds to 
pay the homeowner’s fee starting in 2009 because of lack of income. The homeowner’s 
association garnished his pay, Applicant made some payments directly to the 
homeowner’s association and the debts have been satisfied. (Tr. 20-31; AX B, 
Judgment Satisfaction Notice, dated October 24, 2017) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.d is for Applicant’s home mortgage. Applicant was unable to 
make his full mortgage payments from 2009 until 2012 because of underemployment 
and unemployment. Applicant entered a mortgage modification agreement in 2015 with 
the new mortgage provider, changing the monthly payment to $1,057. The new 
payments are past-due approximately $4,317, because he prioritized the payment of 
other debts. Applicant claims that the mortgage service company did not modify his 
mortgage but they will accept whatever payments he can make, and will add the 
amount not paid to the end of the mortgage. He claims he made a mortgage payment 
just before the hearing. He did not present any documents to verify any arrangements 
with the mortgage company, or any receipts for payments he made. (Tr. 32-36) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.e is for a credit card Applicant opened in 2005. He made 
payments on the credit card debt until 2008 when he did not have income because of 
underemployment and unemployment. Applicant told the security investigator at the PSI 
that he would make arrangements to pay the debt. He claims to have spoken to the 
creditor but no agreement was reached. He has not made any payments on the debt 
because he had other debts to pay. (Tr. 36-38; AX 2, PSI at 5) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.f is in collection for a credit card debt. Applicant opened the 
credit card in 2008, and fell behind in payments in 2009. He has not made any 
payments on the debt because he has not had the funds. He told the security 
investigator at the PSI that he plans to establish a payment plan with the creditor or use 
a debt consolidation plan to pay the debt. Applicant did not present any documents to 
verify any actions he has taken on the debt. (Tr. 38; AX 2, PSI at 5-6) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.g is for a security system Applicant purchased along with his 
house in 2006. He was unable to make payments on the debt starting in 2009 when he 
became unemployed. He has not been able to pay off the debt. He told the security 
investigator the he would set up a payment plan or use a debt consolidation to pay off 
the debt. Applicant did not provide any document to verify his plan. (Tr. 38; AX 2, PSI at 
6) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.h is for television service. Applicant claims that he paid the 
debt. He did not provide any documents or receipts to verify his claim that the debt has 
been paid. (Tr. 38-39) 
Policies 
 
  5 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
  6 
 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially irresponsible, may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in 
his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in 
one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects 
of life. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports confirm the delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. Based on the information provided 
by Applicant, I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
  7 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The only mitigating condition that applies is the mitigating condition at ¶ AG 
20(c). Applicant’s debts were caused by his underemployment and unemployment 
which are conditions beyond his control. However, he did not take reasonable and 
adequate action to resolve his debts when he had sufficient income, so the remaining 
mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous and not resolved, so 
they are recent. Applicant did not provide information concerning financial counseling or 
participation in debt consolidation programs. Good faith means acting in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A promise to pay delinquent debts 
is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant did not provide information to establish that he resolved the debts 
alleged in the SOR except for the debt to the homeowner’s association listed at SOR 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.i. While this debt has been paid, it was not paid by Applicant’s voluntary 
payments but through a payroll garnishment. Applicant did not present any information 
to establish that he has a plan indicating how he will pay or resolve the remaining debts. 
Applicant has been gainfully employed since at least February 2012. While his income 
is not as significant as his income prior to being laid off in 2012, the income is 
significant. He has not presented any evidence of a budget and the state of his 
finances. He seems to have sufficient income to make progress in resolving his 
delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant did not establish that he acted reasonably under the circumstances. 
Except for the payment by garnishment of the homeowner’s association debt, Applicant 
presented no evidence of debt payments or resolution of other debts. He did not 
develop or present plans to pay his remaining delinquent debts. He did not provide 
documentation to show proof of payments, correspondence to or from the creditors to 
establish maintenance of contact, copies of debt disputes, evidence of attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of progress or resolution. There is no clear 
evidence that his debt problems have been resolved, so his finances are not under 
control. There is insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his debts.  
 
 Applicant’s ability to resolve his financial problems are within his means and 
control. Since he did not present a plan to resolve his financial problems or make an 
effort to pay or resolve his delinquent debts, he has not established a good-faith effort to 
  8 
 
pay his debts. His lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a 
strong indication that he will not protect and safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate financial security 
concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not present sufficient 
and adequate evidence to establish that he took reasonable and responsible action to 
resolve his financial obligations. Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate 
management of his finances and did not show a record of action to resolve financial 
issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial situation. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  9 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b -1.c:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
