 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07068 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Despite having access 
to classified information for over 40 years, Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign 
influence concerns raised by his 2011 marriage to a woman with significant family and 
financial ties to China. Accordingly, Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information is revoked. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the written 
record. The Government submitted its case, called a File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
to Applicant on August 26, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2016, 
and provided a response. The documents offered by the Government are admitted to 
the record as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant’s FORM response is 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. All documents are admitted without objection. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about China. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant 
facts are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.2  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 Applicant, 66, is an employee of a federal contactor. He currently lives and works 
abroad. Applicant immigrated to the United States when he was ten years old and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen four years later. His mother, three siblings, and three 
children are citizens and residents of the United States. Applicant was initially granted a 
security clearance in 1972 in connection with his service in the U.S. Army from 1972 to 
1974, when he was honorably discharged. Applicant worked as a federal civilian 
employee from 1978 until his retirement in 2007. He held a security clearance for the 
duration of his civilian employment. Applicant began working as a federal contractor in 
2007. Since then, he has worked on various projects around the world. Applicant 
completed his most recent security clearance application in October 2014, disclosing his 
wife’s foreign relatives and foreign assets.  
 
 In November 2011, Applicant married a native of the People’s Republic of China 
(China). Their wedding took place in China. She became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 
June 2014. Applicant’s wife has an adult son, a brother, and two sisters who are also 
citizens and residents of China. Her son works for a local police department. Her sisters 
                                                          
2 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE I. 
  
3 Unless otherwise identified, these findings are supported by information in GE 1-4 and AE A. 
 
3 
 
are homemakers and her brother currently works in a factory. Both of her parents are 
deceased. Applicant traveled to China in June 2011, March 2013, and December 2013. 
During the June 2011 trip, which lasted until February 2012, Applicant and his wife 
married. The two latter trips were taken to visit his wife’s family. However, Applicant and 
his in-laws do not share a common language, and are unable to communicate directly. 
Applicant does not believe his ties to his stepson or in-laws are a potential source of 
vulnerability or exploitation. Applicant’s wife, on the other hand, maintains regular 
contract with her son and siblings.  
 
Applicant’s wife also owns real estate in China, consisting of two apartments, 
valued at $140,000. According to Applicant, his wife owned the assets before their 
marriage. Applicant admits that one of the apartments was purchased with the intention 
of serving as their primary residence. Ultimately, the couple decided to designate the 
United States as their permanent residence. However, their current living situation is 
unclear from the record. Applicant’s wife also has an account with a Chinese bank, 
which the SOR alleges contained $11,000. Applicant claims to have no ownership 
interest in the properties or any control over his wife’s foreign assets, and that his wife is 
in the process of divesting herself of her foreign financial interests. He did not provide 
any corroborating documentation. Although Applicant reports that he receives a pension 
from his federal civilian service and has significant savings, he did not provide detailed 
corroborating information about financial ties to the United States.  
 
Applicant believes that his wife’s ties to China have no impact on him and should 
not impact his ongoing security worthiness. He has completed all his required security 
training, follows applicable security protocols, and is circumspect in his dealings with 
foreign nationals when working overseas. Given his professional expertise, Applicant 
believes that he is at low risk of being targeted by the Chinese government. He also 
asserts that through their marriage vows, Applicant’s wife’s loyalty is to him and any 
conflicts of interests she may face can be expected to be resolved in the interest of the 
United States. As further evidence of her U.S. preference, Applicant reports that his wife 
filed a petition in 2016 to sponsor her son’s immigration to the United States.  
 
According to the National Counterintelligence Executive, China is among the 
most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology and is the 
world's most active and persistent perpetrators of economic espionage. Chinese 
attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information will continue at a high 
level and will continue to represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. economic 
security. China's intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, 
frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 HE I.  
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests, including financial and property interests, may 
become a national security concern if they result in a divided allegiance, or may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in 
 
5 
 
a way inconsistent with U.S. interests, or make an individual otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.5 
 
 The analysis and application of the disqualifying conditions in this case involves 
more than an evaluation of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. While Applicant 
may not have any direct ties of affection or obligation to any foreign nationals or 
possess any foreign financial interests, his wife does. His wife’s familial ties and 
financial interests are significant and material to a determination of Applicant’s ongoing 
security worthiness. Her son and three siblings are residents and citizens of China and 
she holds approximately $150,000 of assets in that country.  This is enough to establish 
a prima facie case that these connections create a potential conflict of interest between 
Applicant’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, government or country.6 
  
 Applicant has failed to meet his burden of production or persuasion necessary to 
mitigate the identified foreign influence concern. Applicant argues that because of their 
marriage vows, his wife’s primary loyalty is to him, his family, and the United States. 
She may have similar expectations of Applicant. Just as Applicant’s family is rooted in 
the United States, his wife’s family is just as rooted in China. Based on the information 
available in the record, Applicant’s wife’s ties to China may be as strong as Applicant’s 
ties to the United States. Applicant and his wife married in China, and she bought an 
apartment with the intention of making it the couple’s primary residence. Both are 
indicators of his wife’s ties to her native country.  
 
 The record does not contain sufficient information to establish that, given his ties 
of loyalty, affection, and obligation to his wife, Applicant can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. Furthermore, the record does not contain 
information to support a finding that Applicant’s wife’s significant financial interests in 
China are unlikely to result in a conflict or be used to effectively influence, manipulate or 
pressure him. The record is devoid of information about Applicant’s U.S.-based finances 
before entering the marriage or about the couple’s joint assets.  
 
 Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s continued eligibility for 
access to classified information. The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”7 Applicant has held a 
security clearance for over 40 years as a military member, a civilian employee, and a 
federal contractor. However, there is no right to a security clearance.8 Similarly, there is 
no presumption in favor of granting a security clearance.9 Applicant’s most recent 
                                                          
5 See, AG ¶ 6. 
 
6 AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
7 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
9 Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1403 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  
 
6 
 
background investigation revealed a significant change in his circumstances. These 
changes, specifically his marriage to an individual with significant familial and financial 
ties to China have increased his vulnerability to exploitation, making him an 
unacceptable security risk.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for continued access 
to classified information is denied.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
