 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08019 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment as 
a linguist for a defense contractor. Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 13, 2014. After reviewing the 
e-QIP and result of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On May 5, 2016, 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 31, 2016, admitting the nine allegations 
under Guideline B. The allegations detailed concern about his family members, friends, 
and property in Afghanistan. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 
27, 2017, and I was assigned the case on September 26, 2017. DOD issued Applicant a 
notice of hearing on February 12, 2018, for a hearing on March 22, 2018. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s two exhibits (GX 1 and 2) were admitted 
into the record without objection. Applicant did not present any exhibits. I received the 
transcript of the hearing on April 3, 2018.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGS) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs, and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning Afghanistan, and provided relevant United States Department of State 
documents. (GX 3) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning Afghanistan as 
noted in my Findings of Fact.  
 
Applicant was advised at the hearing that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (GX 2) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. Applicant did not object to the admissibility of the PSI summary. (Tr. 12-13) I 
will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1978 and is 40 years old. He completed his 
studies for a bachelor’s degree at a university in Afghanistan in 2003, and received his 
diploma from that university in 2008. He is presently studying at a university in the 
United States for a bachelor’s degree in accounting, which he expects to receive in 
December 2018. (Tr. 14-15; GX 1, e-QIP, dated May 16, 2014) 
 
 Applicant arrived in the United States in October 2008, and became a United 
States citizen in February 2014. He is not married but is engaged to a woman who was 
born in Afghanistan. She came to the United States in 2009 and became a U.S. citizen 
in 2015. She recently completed her college education and is working as a medical 
 
3 
 
 
assistant. She is waiting to enter medical school. Applicant and his fiancée live full time 
in the United States. (Tr. 15-16; 24-25) 
 
 Applicant has been employed as a technician and inspector for a United States 
engineering and construction company since November 2016. He previously worked as 
a linguist for a contractor in Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005. His assignments included 
working at the Afghan military training center, at the Presidential palace for the Afghan 
Army, and then for the U.S. Special forces at a forward operating base near the border 
with Pakistan. The forward operating base was in a location that is considered a 
dangerous area. He was not directly involved in combat action but was nearby when 
bombs and ordnance exploded. He became a linguist because he was seeking 
employment. He has been recruited by a defense contractor to return to Afghanistan as 
a linguist if cleared for eligibility for access to classified information. He was never in the 
Afghan military or employed by the Afghan government. He visits Afghanistan about 
every two or three years, mostly for special occasions. He stays approximately 10 days, 
usually at his mother’s house. His last visit was in November 2017 for his sister’s 
wedding. His last visit before November 2017 was in July 2015. (Tr. 16-22, 27-28) 
 
 The SOR alleges his fiancée is a citizen of Afghanistan (SOR 1.a); his two 
roommates are citizens of Afghanistan (SOR 1.b); his mother is a citizen of Afghanistan 
(SOR 1.c); three sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan and one sister works 
for an Afghan government ministry (SOR 1.d); another sister is a citizen of Afghanistan 
(SOR 1.e); his mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan (SOR 1.f); his brother in law is a 
citizen and resident of Afghanistan (SOR 1.g); he has foreign contacts who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan (SOR 1.h); and he has property in Afghanistan worth 
approximately $28,000 (SOR 1.i). 
 
 Applicant established that his fiancée is now a United States citizen (SOR 1.a). 
He no longer has any roommates. (SOR 1.b) He is still in contact with them, but they 
have been citizens and residents of the United States since 2015. (Tr. 31-32) 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a resident and citizen of Afghanistan (SOR 1.c). She is 
approximately 57 years old, and a homemaker. She owns a house that she rents out, 
and rents a smaller house to stay in. He has monthly contact with her by phone. He last 
saw her in November 2017 when he stayed with her and attended his sister's wedding. 
His mother never visited him in the United States. He does not know if he will inherit 
anything from his mother since he told the family that he wants his sisters in 
Afghanistan to get his share of any property. (Tr. 32.33) 
  
 Applicant has three sisters who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan (SOR 
1.d). One sister is 33 years old. He has monthly contact with her by phone and last saw 
her in November 2017. She has no children and is married to a dentist. He talks to her 
approximately monthly by phone. Her husband is 37 years old; a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan; has his own dental practice; and lectures at an Afghan medical school 
(SOR 1.g). He attended a medical convention in the United States, but Applicant did not 
see him during his visit. Applicant last saw him in Afghanistan in November 2017. He 
 
4 
 
 
talks to him about quarterly by phone or text. Another sister is 31 years old. He has 
monthly contact with her by phone. She is an engineer and works as an advisor for the 
Afghan finance ministry. She married in November 2017 and has no children. His last 
trip to Afghanistan was to attend her wedding. Her husband has his own small 
construction company. Applicant does not believe he has any contracts with the Afghan 
government. Applicant’s third sister in Afghanistan is a law student at the American 
University in Afghanistan. She is not married; he talks to her monthly by phone; he last 
saw her in November 2017; and she has never visited him in the United States. (Tr. 33-
42, 48-50) 
 
 His fourth sister is a full time citizen and resident of the United States (SOR 1.e). 
She is 38 years old; came to the United States in September 2008; and became a 
United States citizen in 2015. At the time the SOR was drafted, this sister was living in 
the United States but was not yet a United States citizen. She is married and her 
husband was a medical doctor in Afghanistan. He became a United States citizen about 
the same time Applicant’s sister became a U.S. citizen. He now teaches at the Defense 
Language Institute. They have two children who are students now residing with their 
grandparents in Afghanistan. He does not know what they are studying. He has no 
contact with them, and last saw them in November 2017 when he attended his sister’s 
wedding. (Tr. 42-46) 
 
 His mother in law came to the United States in 2009, and became a United 
States citizen in 2015 (SOR 1.f).1 She was an engineer in Afghanistan. As far as 
Applicant knows, she never worked for the Afghan government. He has only limited 
contact with her through his fiancée. (Tr. 46-48) 
 
 He sees acquaintances when he visits Afghanistan (SOR 1.h). He does not have 
frequent contact with them at any other time. He interprets the term acquaintance to be 
just people he knows and sees when he visits Afghanistan. His sister’s mother-in-law 
and father-in-law are retired people that he occasionally sees when visiting Afghanistan 
but he has no other contact with them. (Tr. 50-52) 
 
 Applicant purchased property in Afghanistan in 2006 (SOR 1.i), and sold it in 
2015. It was sold at a price calculated in Afghan money, so he does not know how 
much he received for the property in U.S. dollars. He used the funds to buy rental 
property in the United States. He no longer owns any property in Afghanistan. (Tr. 24-
27) 
 
 Applicant’s present salary is $17 an hour and he usually works 40 hours a week. 
He can work overtime at time-and-a-half. Applicant owns his house in the United States 
valued at approximately $200,000. He also has two rental properties that are each 
valued from $170,000 to $180,000. He is not sure of the amount of equity that he has in 
the properties. He does not have a retirement account. He has no foreign income. He 
believes his net worth in the United States is approximately $500,000. (Tr. 21-24) 
                                                          
1 Since Applicant is not married, the mother in law referred to in this allegation must be the mother of his 
fiancée.  
 
5 
 
 
 Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, and it was a monarchy 
until a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded and occupied 
Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the mujahedeen. The Soviet Union withdrew in 
February 1989 pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United 
States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahedeen were not a party to the agreement and 
refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several factions, including the 
Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan, committed 
atrocities against minority populations, and provided sanctuary to terrorist organizations. 
U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban 
out of power by November 2001. With the assistance and support of the United States, 
a new democratic government took office in 2004. 
 
 Afghanistan formed a democratic government in 2004. The United States and its 
coalition partners have over 50,000 troops serving in Afghanistan assisting the Afghan 
government in maintaining peace and stability in the country. Even though progress has 
been made since then, Afghanistan faces many challenges including defeating terrorists 
and insurgents, recovering from decades of civil strife, and rebuilding an economy and 
infrastructure. The Taliban insurgency has continued with frequent, sophisticated, 
dangerous, and destabilizing activities in spite of United States and coalition military 
operations. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence. The Taliban continues to 
maintain momentum in spite of losses to their leadership. Armed conflict has spread to 
almost one-third of the country. The lack of security in many areas and generally low 
government capacity and competency has hampered efforts at self-governance and 
economic development. There is continued government corruption and substantial drug 
trade.  
 
 Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor with extrajudicial killings, 
torture, poor prison conditions, official impunity, prolonged pretrial detention, restrictions 
on freedom of press and religion, violence against women, sexual abuse against 
children, and human trafficking. Its poor human rights record is due to the continuing 
insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two decades of 
war. In spite of efforts by the United States and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The weak government and internal 
instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, terrorists, and insurgents to 
continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile to the United States. 
Insurgents use narcotics trafficking and kidnapping to finance their military and technical 
capabilities. Suicide bombing attacks continue to inflict casualties. The Taliban has 
strengthened its activities because of Pakistan funding sources, the drug trade, and 
kidnappings. The Taliban insurgent operations result in numerous attacks and deaths 
targeted at non-government organizations, journalists, government workers, and United 
Nation workers. There are militant attacks by rockets, vehicle-born explosive devices, 
and suicide bombing, even in the capital city, Kabul. The United States Department of 
State classifies the situation in Afghanistan as a critical security threat to United States 
citizens. (Item 3) 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create circumstances in 
 
7 
 
 
which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interest or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interests is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associate 
with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant has immediate family members who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s mother, three sisters, mother-in-law, brother–in-law; and some 
acquaintances have been citizens and residents of Afghanistan all of their lives. His 
contact with these family members is through phone calls and occasional visits to 
Afghanistan.  
 
 There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf 
of the United States forces while employed as an interpreter and linguist. He is willing to 
serve again and share in those dangers. Afghanistan is not a stable country and there is 
a significant threat of violence and terrorism. In spite of his limited contact with his family 
members, the family members in Afghanistan are a security concern because of 
violence and instability raising the following Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions 
under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The U. S. has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the U. S. Even friendly nations can have profound 
 
8 
 
 
disagreements with the U. S. over matters they view as important to their vital interests 
or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the U. S., 
especially in economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the U. S., and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has contact with family members who are residents and citizens of 
Afghanistan. Afghanistan has experienced dangerous, destabilizing terrorist’s activities, 
an increase in violence against civilians, a general lack of security, and a poor human 
rights record. There is a growing sense of violence creating unsafe and unstable 
conditions. The U. S. Department of State issued a travel warning for U.S. citizens 
based on terrorist activities and an inability to provide security. These factors place a 
heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion on 
Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for or 
obligation to immediate family members. Applicant has contact with his family member 
in Afghanistan by telephone and visits. He attended his sister’s wedding recently and 
stayed with his family. These facts establish a close and continuing relationship 
between Applicant and his family members in Afghanistan. His level of contact is not 
casual or infrequent, and indicates that Applicant’s sense of loyalty to the family 
members is high rather than minimal.  
 
 Applicant’s ties and sense of loyalty to the U. S. are extensive. He worked in 
Afghanistan as a linguist for U.S. Forces for over two years in 2003 to 2005. He came to 
the United States in November 2008, and became a U. S. citizen in February 2014. He 
 
9 
 
 
has almost completed his studying at a U. S. university for a bachelor’s degree in 
accounting. While most of his immediate family members are in Afghanistan, he does 
have a sister, brother-in-law, fiancée, and former roommates who are residents and 
citizens of the U. S. He no longer owns property in Afghanistan. All of his assets are in 
the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan can place him in a position to have to 
choose between the interests of the family members and the interests of the United 
States. The passage of time has shown that many of the family members mentioned in 
the original SOR allegations about Afghan residency and citizenship are now U. S. 
citizens and residents. Even though his family members are ordinary citizens, the 
situation in Afghanistan is such that through them Applicant can be vulnerable to 
exploitation, pressure, or inducement to provide protected information. However, his 
connection to and loyalty to the U. S. is so deep and longstanding that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U. S. interests. Accordingly, 
Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his relationships with his family 
members in Afghanistan is not a security concern. I conclude Appellant has mitigated 
security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. I considered that 
Applicant has worked as a linguist for U.S. Forces in Afghanistan for over two years with 
no reported security issues.  
 
 
10 
 
 
The presence of Applicant’s immediate family members and other relatives in 
Afghanistan creates a heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the potential for 
vulnerability, pressure, or coercion on Applicant. However, Applicant served as a 
linguist for over two years in Afghanistan. He has volunteered to return for another tour 
as a linguist. He is willing to continue to serve and risk his life as part of his duties on 
behalf of U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks to himself. All 
of these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him. His honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of is 
security clearance.  
 
These facts leave me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for access to classified information. The protection of the national security 
is the paramount consideration. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence concerns based on his family members in Afghanistan. 
Access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
