 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03955 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 2, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 21, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A through D. There were no objections to any of the exhibits, and they were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.n, and 
1.p. She denied the remaining SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She served on active duty in the military from March 
2003 until October 2006 and received an honorable discharge. She served with the Army 
National Guard from October 2006 to January 2011 and was honorably discharged. She 
served in Afghanistan for 12 months before being discharged. After her discharge she 
was unemployed for seven months. She was married from 2003 to 2005. She has a 14-
year-old child from a previous relationship. She does not have custody of the child and 
does not pay child support. She earned an associate’s degree in 2008. She has worked 
for her present employer since October 2015. She also works a part-time job.2 
 
 The SOR alleges delinquent student loans (¶¶ 1.a through 1.f and 1.l) totaling 
approximately $44,461. Applicant obtained these loans in 2007. She testified that she 
started making $120 monthly payments in approximately 2009. She stopped the 
payments in 2009 and made $20 monthly payments. She did not know when she stopped 
these payments. She testified that “I started paying in 2016 because I planned on going 
back to school and I had to get them current in order to go back.”3 In 2016, she made 
payments of $5 a month, but could not recall how many months she made these 
payments, but stated she was supposed to start paying $300 a month, but she could not 
afford to make the payments and stopped in November 2017. It is unknown if she made 
any payments. She has not restarted a payment plan. She testified the student loans are 
in default again.4 The delinquent student loans are unresolved.  
 
 Applicant testified that none of the other debts alleged in the SOR are paid. She 
stated she was unaware of some of the debts, and some she wants to dispute. She stated 
that the medical debts alleged are for services she received in 2014. She submitted an 
application in 2014, presumably to the hospital that provided service, to help reduce her 
medical bills. She admitted that she failed to follow up on the application. She did not 
have medical insurance at the time. She was unable to pay the medical bills when they 
                                                          
2 Tr. 19-25, 54-60; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 28. 
 
4 Tr. 25-32. 
 
3 
 
 
were due. She knew she owed medical debts. She did not contact any of the medical 
providers to make payment arrangements. The debts are corroborated by Applicant’s 
admissions and credit reports from November 2016 and December 2015.5 
 
 Regarding the other debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant stated she was not able 
to pay them because she did not have enough income. She said she disputed some of 
the debts, but did not have the documents or receipts to corroborate payment or her 
actions. She reached a settlement agreement with one creditor, but could not afford to 
pay it. She sought help from a debt consolidation company that was fraudulent. She works 
80 hours a week so she can accumulate money to hire an attorney to help her dispute 
and settle her debts. She has had no financial counseling. She has some discretionary 
income at the end of each month after paying bills, but she needs the money for 
maintenance on her car and other necessities. She is living paycheck to paycheck. She 
earns barely over the minimum wage. She stated no one ever explained to her how credit 
works. She is working so she can pay her delinquent debts. She plans on paying her 
debts, but has not been in a position to do so. 6 
 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on her November 
2015 security clearance application that she had bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency or that she had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled 
for failing to pay as agreed. Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator in 
June 2016. The summary of interview stated that Applicant “volunteered” that she had 
debts that were in collection. She failed to disclose them on her security clearance 
application due to an unintentional oversight. Her student loans were in collection, but 
she could not recall when she opened her student loans, when they became past due, 
and the details of the collection efforts. She explained that in May 2016 she made 
arrangements to pay $5 a month so she might qualify for a deferment. She could not 
recall any other details about the student loans. She also indicated that she was unaware 
that her medical debts were in collection status. Regarding all of her delinquent debts, 
she stated that she intended to obtain a credit report, contact the creditors, and if the debt 
was valid, she would make payment arrangements. Applicant testified that she did not 
know why she initially failed to disclose her delinquent collection accounts on her security 
clearance application.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Tr. 32-41; GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. 32-53, 60-65; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. 43-51. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and student loans from at least 2010 
that she has been unwilling or unable to pay. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of Applicant’s delinquent debts or student loans are resolved. Her debts are 
recent. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant had a period of unemployment in 2012, 
which was beyond her control. She did not have medical insurance and is 
underemployed, both of which are also beyond her control. For the full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. After 2010, 
Applicant stopped making payments on her student loans because she did not earn 
enough income. She did not do anything regarding her student loans until after she 
completed her security clearance application. She has not resolved any of the delinquent 
debts or made new payment arrangements for her delinquent student loans. She 
completed an application to have her medical debts reduced, but never followed up on it. 
Despite her promise during her background interview, to contact creditors and resolve 
debts, she did not provide evidence that she has done so. She has not acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she has participated in financial counseling, 
made a good-faith effort to repay her delinquent debts and student loans, and did not 
provide evidence to corroborate possible disputes that she has with any of the alleged 
creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.   
  
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
7 
 
 
I have considered all of the evidence and conclude that Applicant was aware that 
her student loans were delinquent and in collection. She deliberately omitted on her 
November 2015 security clearance application that her student loans were in collection. 
She was unaware that some of her other debts were in collection. The above disqualifying 
condition applies. 
 
One mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17 is potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 
When Applicant was interviewed by the Government investigator, before being 
confronted with her delinquent debts, she disclosed that her student loans were in 
collection. AG ¶ 17(a) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old veteran. She experienced a period of unemployment in 
2011 after her honorable discharge from the military. She is also underemployed. She 
has numerous delinquent debts and student loans that are unpaid. She failed to provide 
sufficient evidence that she is addressing her delinquent debts. She does not have a 
reliable financial track record. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
 
8 
 
 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E, 
but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
