 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-01376 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate or rebut the financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 
8, 2017. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2016, and requested his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). On 
March 8, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on March 13, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response 
to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence.  Items 1 through 8 are admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to another administrative judge on October 1, 2017, and re-assigned 
to me on May 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and married. He has two children. He served in the Air 
Force  Reserve from 1985 to 1988, when he received an honorable discharge. He has 
worked in private industry since about 2005. (Item 3)  
 
 On May 7, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In it, 
he did not disclose any delinquent debts or criminal incidents as required. (Item 1) In 
December 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator about 
information in his SCA, in addition to other matters. When confronted about undisclosed 
delinquent debts and criminal conduct, Applicant stated that he answered the questions 
quickly and thought he answered them correctly. (Item 4) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations raised under both 
guidelines. He admitted that he had unpaid consumer debts and was delinquent on child 
support payments. He admitted that he was arrested numerous times for financial crimes 
involving theft and drug and alcohol offenses. He discussed those crimes with the 
investigator. He admitted that he failed to disclose the crimes, including felonies. (Item 2) 
He did not submit evidence addressing any debts or the personal conduct allegations.   
  
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2016 
and June 2015, the SOR alleged five delinquent debts, including two for unpaid child 
support. The debts totaled over $20,000. It also alleged financial crimes, mostly involving 
theft that occurred between 1994 and 2007. The SOR also alleged five additional arrests 
and crimes relating to drugs that he failed to disclose in his SCA.. (Item 1, Item 2)  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. 
He did not provide a budget or other information related to his financial obligations from 
which to determine his current financial reliability. Other than his Answer that contained 
admissions, he provided no other information in response to the SOR.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
  
Analysis 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
     
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing deceptive 
loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
  
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations 
that occurred between 2010 and 2015. His history of engaging in financial crimes 
involving theft began in 1994 and continued into 2007. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
 
5 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing. His failure to provide 
evidence that he is addressing any of them in a meaningful way and his history of stealing 
property that does not that belong to him create ongoing concerns about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such 
problems will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant neither 
claimed that his debts arose from circumstances beyond his control, nor showed that he 
acted responsibly under such circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
He provided no evidence of financial counseling or budget information establishing 
solvency going forward or ability to repay his delinquencies. He failed to demonstrate that 
these problems are being resolved, are under control, or that a good-faith effort toward 
resolution has been initiated. Nor did he present evidence that he resolved all theft 
charges. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns 
under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three may be potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
The evidence established a disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant failed 
to disclose requested financial and criminal conduct information. He provided no 
persuasive information that would explain or justify this conduct. His assertion during an 
interview that he thought he answered the questions accurately is not credible.  
 
The evidence also established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (e)(1). 
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under another guideline, but is sufficient to raise serious questions about 
his judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. His 
concealment of that history creates a vulnerability to manipulation because if it were 
publicly known, it could affect his personal and professional standing in the community.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Five are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature adult, who served in the military for three years. He continues 
to owe more than $20,000 in unpaid child support and other small debts. He falsified his 
SCA by failing to disclose his delinquent debts and criminal history. Overall, the evidence 
creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guidelines for financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:       Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          AGAINST APPLICANT  
  
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.p:       Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
