 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-02583  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant mitigated the 
personal conduct concerns, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations concerns 
associated with his $10,700 in unpaid delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct and financial 
considerations guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on January 9, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
without objection. Applicant did not offer any documents.  I received the transcript (Tr.) 
on January 12, 2018. The record remained open after the hearing to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documentation. Applicant did not submit anything by the February 9, 
2018 deadline.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded those implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
decided this case under the 2017 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 33, works as a telecommunications specialist for a federal contractor. 
He was initially granted access to classified information when he served in the U.S. 
Army from August 2002 to December 2012. Applicant completed his most recent 
security clearance application in October 2015 in connection with his current 
employment. He disclosed derogatory information regarding past illegal drug use and 
his finances. The ensuing investigation revealed additional criminal incidents and more 
delinquent accounts.3  
 
Applicant enlisted in the Army in August 2002 when he was 18 years old. In 
2004, he was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol. Although his blood-
alcohol level was under the legal limit, Applicant was under the legal drinking age. He 
pleaded guilty and successfully completed the terms of his deferred adjudication 
program.4  
 
In 2006, Applicant married his girlfriend of six months after learning she was 
pregnant. In January 2007, the newly married couple moved overseas to Applicant’s 
new duty station. The couple began experiencing marital problems immediately. 
Applicant’s wife did not adjust well to the military lifestyle or being so far away from 
home. Their relationship grew contentious and Applicant became depressed. In 2009, 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel provided discovery to Applicant on December 29, 2016.  
 
3 GE 1.  
 
4 Tr. 19-20; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
Applicant admits that he used cocaine while at a party. He testified that he used the 
drug to self-medicate his depressive feelings.5  
 
In an effort to rehabilitate his marriage, Applicant elected a duty station in his 
wife’s hometown. However, when they returned to the United States, the marriage did 
not improve and Applicant’s depressive mood continued. Between 2010 and 2012, 
Applicant tried a number of anti-depressants, but stopped taking them because he did 
not like the side effects. In 2012, Applicant began using the synthetic cannabinoid, 
Spice, which he believed would mimic the calming side effects of marijuana and 
alleviate his depression and stress. In June 2012, Applicant was arrested at his home 
for suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol. Incident to the arrest, the police 
found Spice on Applicant’s person and in a storage closet on his porch. According to the 
report of investigation, “. . . [Applicant] was interviewed and denied smoking Spice. A 
subsequent urinalysis confirmed [Applicant] has used Spice.” At hearing, Applicant 
explained that he denied using Spice the day of his arrest. The record does not include 
either the investigating officer’s or Applicant’s statements contemporaneous to the 
incident. Based on the investigation, Applicant was charged with failure to obey a 
general order and wrongful use and possession of a controlled substance (synthetic 
cannabinoids). Because of these charges, he was discharged from the Army, receiving 
a general discharge under honorable conditions.6  
 
Applicant and his wife divorced in December 2013. Between 2013 and 2016, 
Applicant was also cited for three traffic infractions. He pleaded guilty to charges of 
speeding (nine miles over the posted speed limit) in October 2014 and November 2015. 
In June 2016, he was cited for driving on a suspended license and failure to change his 
address within 30 days of moving to a new jurisdiction. Applicant explained that his 
license was suspended because of an erroneous reporting from another state that 
Applicant failed to pay a speeding ticket.7  
 
After his divorce, Applicant’s finances became his primary stressor. In the two 
years after his discharge from the Army, Applicant experienced periods of 
unemployment and underemployment that made it difficult to keep up with his financial 
obligations. He fell behind on his child support, culminating in an arrest. He was evicted 
from his apartment. Over the course of those two years, Applicant incurred the $10,700 
in delinquent debt alleged in the SOR in addition to other unalleged personal debt. In 
2015, Applicant did not have federal or state income taxes withheld from his pay, 
resulting in an $800 federal tax liability and a $5,000 state income tax liability.  Applicant 
testified that his finances and depressive mood improved when he accepted his current 
job. Now earning over $70,000 annually, he has money to repay his debts. He claims to 
have paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. He also claims to 
have resolved other unalleged debts, including a $3,000 personal loan to his former 
employer, and his federal and state income tax liabilities. However, Applicant did not 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20-23, 37. 
 
6 GE 23-29, 37-43, 55-56; GE 3.  
 
7 Tr. 46-47; GE 6.   
 
4 
 
provide corroborating evidence of these payments. He has not received any financial 
counseling.8 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
` 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative process.  The record establishes the Government’s 
prima facie case under personal conduct guidelines.9  
                                                          
8 Tr. 29-36, 43-45, 51-52, 56; GE 4.  
 
9 AG ¶ 15.   
 
5 
 
The SOR alleges adverse information in several adjudicative areas: criminal 
conduct; drug involvment and substance misuse; and personal conduct. He was 
arrested and convicted of DUI in 2004 and in 2012 was charged with drug-related 
crimes that resulted in his separation from the Army. Applicant used illegal drugs in 
2009 and 2012 while serving on active duty in the military and holding a security 
clearance. During the 2012 Army investigation, Applicant intentionally lied about his use 
of synthetic cannabinoids. Between 2013 and 2016, he was cited for three traffic 
infractions. Given the age of the criminal conduct, drug use, and the falsification, and 
the minor nature of the traffic citations, none of the alleged conduct is sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline. However, when it is considered 
as a whole, Applicant’s conduct supports a negative whole-person assessment of 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that suggest he may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information.10  
 
 However, these concerns are mitigated by the passage of time. Applicant’s 
misconduct occurred during the years when he was in a difficult marriage. He was 
young, immature, and did not have the skills to cope with the depression and stress in 
his personal life and behaved inappropriately. However, since his 2013 divorce, there is 
no indication that Applicant has engaged in similar conduct.11 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
While the personal conduct concerns are mitigated, the financial considerations 
concerns remain. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to nine creditors for 
$10,700. Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.12 The record 
supports a finding that Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations 
and an inability to satisfy his debts.13   
 
 Applicant’s financial problems became acute after his discharge from the military. 
Because his discharge and subsequent periods of unemployment and 
underemployment were caused by his criminal conduct, it cannot be said the financial 
problems were caused by events beyond his control. Although Applicant claims that he 
has resolved several SOR and non-SOR debts, he did not provide evidence of his 
good-faith efforts to repay his creditors. He also has continued to incur delinquent debts, 
specifically federal and state tax debt that remains unresolved. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence to establish that his finances are under control.  
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 16 (a). 
 
11 AG ¶  17(c). 
 
12 AG ¶ 18. 
 
13 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d).  Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concern raised 
by his history delinquent debts. Because Applicant has not demonstrated a clear track 
record of rehabilitation or reform, it is not appropriate to grant him access to classified 
information at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
