 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03690 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John T. Heaney, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
May 3, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines E and D.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on May 1, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on May 4, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 24, 2017. The hearing was convened 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
AG, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was issued under the previous 
AG. Applicant was provided with a copy of the new AG prior to the hearing, and permitted time after the 
hearing to submit further argument based on the new guidelines. (Tr. 4-6.) 
 
2 
 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, which were admitted without objection. The record was left 
open until June 23, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. On June 23, 2017, 
Applicant submitted an additional exhibit, marked AppX C, which was admitted without 
objection. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on 
June 5, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since “the age of 20”. (TR at page 
26 line 24 to page 28 line 14.) He has been divorced since 1994, and never remarried. 
(TR at page 50 lines 4~9.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct & Guideline D – Sexual Behavior  
 
 From about March of 2011 until about February of 2016, Applicant has taken 
several vacation trips to Thailand. (TR at page 28 line 15 to page 44 line 5, at page 49 
line 10 to page 50 line 22, at page 52 line 22 to page 63 line 6, and at page 63 line 13 to 
page 65 line 5.) He often frequents Thai bars. (Id.) If he asks one of the female 
employees for a date; and she agrees to said date during her normal work hours, the 
Thai tradition is to pay the bar owner for her lost employment, and to recompense the 
female for her lost wages. (TR at page 28 line 15 to page 44 line 5, at page 49 line 10 to 
page 50 line 22, at page 52 line 22 to page 63 line 6, and at page 63 line 13 to page 65 
line 5.) Sexual activity often occurs during these dates, but not always. (Id.) There is 
nothing illegal about this dating practice, and it is not alleged as being illegal. 
 
 During a 2014 polograph examination regarding a 2014 Thai date, Applicant 
“stressed he paid the women for companionship not sex and any sexual contact that did 
occur was consensual.” (GX 2.) Furthermore, the results of this polygraph examination 
”indicated no deception pertaining to questions involving the release of classified 
information to [an] unauthorized person.” (Id.) Applicant intends to continue a similar 
dating practice both in Thailand and the United States, conditioned on said practice 
being legal. (TR at page 28 line 15 to page 44 line 5, at page 49 line 10 to page 50 line 
22, at page 52 line 22 to page 63 line 6, and at page 63 line 13 to page 65 line 5.) 
Applicant has always reported more than casual meetings with foreign nationals, and 
said meetings are known by Applicant’s family, friends and coworkers. (Id, and AppX 
C.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
  As Applicant has never concealed his dating conduct from family, friends or 
coworkers, the evidence is insufficient to raise this disqualifying condition. AG ¶ 16(e)(3) 
is not applicable, as such conduct is legal in several counties in the state of Nevada, 
thus not “illegal in the United States.” 
  
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 13. All are potentially applicable in this case: 
   
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
  None of these apply. Applicant’s dating practice is consensual, freely admitted to, 
and totally legal. The evidence is insufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected both at the workplace and in his community. (AppX C.) Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the personal conduct, and sexual behavior security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
