 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-04011 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse, and alcohol 
consumption trustworthiness concerns. National security eligibility for a position of trust is 
granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). Applicant answered the SOR on March 21, 
2017, and requested a hearing (Answer).   
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
January 11, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 12, 2018, setting the 
hearing for January 30, 2018. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. Applicant and one witness testified. He offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without 
objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 7, 2018. The record 
 
 
 
 
2 
remained open until February 20, 2018, for the submission of additional exhibits. 
Applicant timely submitted an exhibit that I marked as AE E and admitted without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and has been married for 28 years. He and his wife have 
three sons. Applicant became licensed as a registered nurse (RN) in 1991, and 
subsequently began working for a hospital. (Tr. 16, 22) In 1994, he obtained a position in 
an intensive care unit for another hospital, and worked there until December 2014, when 
he resigned. (Tr. 22; GE 1) In March 2015, Applicant began his current position as a 
quality assurance nurse with a defense contractor. (Tr. 23; GE 1)  
 
 In early 2000, Applicant developed a herniated disc from weight lifting. He saw a 
physician who prescribed opioids for his cervical pain. Applicant continued to be treated 
by that physician for a period of time, but at a certain point, he decided he was too 
embarrassed to request additional pain medication from his treating physician. In 2002, 
he sought pain medication from an on-line physician. Applicant submitted his medical 
records to that doctor and began receiving prescriptions for Tramadol, a narcotic. He 
continued obtaining those scripts for six years. (Tr. 25-26)   
 
 In 2008, Applicant admitted that the use of Tramadol was having a negative effect 
on his life and that he had developed an addiction to the drug. He decided to seek 
treatment for substance abuse. He voluntarily reported his addiction to his employer and 
requested leave time for treatment. Applicant also reported his addiction to the state’s 
nursing board. In September 2008, Applicant entered a 28-day inpatient treatment 
program with the help of his primary care physician.1 He was diagnosed with opioid 
dependence. (Tr. 26-28; GE 1) After completing the program, he entered the maintenance 
phase of treatment. From about October 2008 to sometime in 2010, he participated in 
weekly individual or group therapy sessions. He attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings twice a week, and was subject to random urine 
screenings every week. He began working with a NA sponsor in 2008, when he entered 
treatment. (Tr. 28-29, 45) 
 
 Subsequent to Applicant’s reporting his addiction to the state’s nursing board in 
2008, the board began monitoring his progress and compliance with the recovery 
program set out by his physician, as noted above, and adherence to the board’s licensing 
protocols. According to those terms, Applicant was not permitted to consume drugs or 
alcohol. (Tr. 31, 39; GE 2)  Sometime in 2010, Applicant’s treatment plan changed. He 
began seeing his physician every six months and not weekly. He continues attending AA 
or NA meetings twice a week. He has random drug screens done twice a month, rather 
than four times. (Tr. 29-31)  
 
 
                                            
1 Applicant’s primary care physician is Board Certified in Addiction Medicine. (AE A) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 From September 2008, when he entered treatment, to December 2014, Applicant 
did not consume alcohol or use drugs, and fully complied with his treatment plan. (Tr. 19) 
In December 2014, Applicant attended his wife’s class reunion. Over the course of the 
party, he consumed four wine coolers. Two days later, he was required to participate in a 
random urine screening. The urine screening tested positive for alcohol, which was a 
violation of the terms of his agreement with the nursing board. Subsequently, the nursing 
board suspended his license for three months, from December 2014 to March 2015, 
during which time he was unable to work. (Tr. 18-19, 41; GE 2)  
 
 Applicant has been in treatment and recovery since he admitted himself to a 
rehabilitation program in September 2008. (Tr. 49) He intends to continue attending NA 
or AA regardless of any requirement to do so. (Tr. 44) He denied that he intends to 
consume alcohol in the future. He stated that “I will not drink alcohol because it’s not worth 
going through what I’m going through right now.” (Tr. 42; Answer) Other than the 
December 2014 incident, Applicant has not had any other relapse and continues to 
comply with all treatment requirements. 
 
 A former colleague, who is now Applicant’s supervisor, testified. He has known 
Applicant since 2006 or 2007, when they worked together at a hospital. He is aware of 
Applicant’s addiction. He is highly complimentary of Applicant’s work performance and 
considers Applicant to be one of his top performers. In Applicant’s most recent evaluation, 
he rated him as exceeding expectations in most areas. (Tr. 47-54; AE B, AE E)  
 
 In her January 22, 2018 letter, Applicant’s physician addressed his recovery. She 
wrote: 
 
I have been treating this person for addiction to Tramadol. He has 
completed formal programming successfully including inpatient treatment 
and outpatient treatment. He has continued to follow a recovery plan 
including: 1) AA twice a week, 2) Sponsor interaction once a month to once 
every other month, and 3) he continues on prescribed Suboxone which is 
an opioid replacement therapy. He has built a strong support system. . . He 
has never had any legal involvement due to his drug addiction. He accepts 
his disease of addiction and fully embraces the need for life long recovery 
skills. . . Clinically he has demonstrated excellent and consistent recovery. 
(AE A) 
 
 Applicant’s nursing license has been in good standing with the state since he 
completed the suspension in early 2015. (Tr. 20, 39) His lawyer told him that the nursing 
board will terminate Applicant’s monitoring soon because he has been compliant with the 
board’s program for over three years. (Tr. 43) Applicant stated he never obtained 
medications illegally. He has never taken or used a patient’s drugs. (Tr. 35-36) He 
expressed remorse over his conduct. His family and friends are aware of Applicant’s 
addiction issues and supportive of his recovery efforts. (Tr. 38)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
The action by the DOD CAF, to issue the SOR to Applicant, was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the trustworthiness concerns involving drug involvement and 
substance misuse as follows: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern. Two may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(b) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of substance use disorder. 
 
Applicant admitted that subsequent to being prescribed Tramadol, a narcotic, in 
2000 for pain management, he began misusing the drug and developed an addiction to it 
by 2008. During inpatient treatment, a physician diagnosed him with opioid dependence, 
a substance use disorder. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse 
trustworthiness concerns are provided in AG ¶ 26. The following three are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence; and 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
 
 
 
6 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 After using a prescribed narcotic for about six years for pain management, 
Applicant acknowledged that he developed an addiction to it and voluntarily sought 
inpatient treatment, followed by outpatient aftercare. He began treatment in September 
2008 and continues to follow his physician’s treatment plan that currently consists of two 
monthly urine screens, weekly attendance at two NA meetings, and periodic meetings 
with his sponsor. Other than one incident in December 2014 involving the consumption 
of alcohol, he has consistently complied with his program and the nursing board’s 
protocols. His physician opined that he has demonstrated an excellent recovery record. 
The evidence established mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(b), (c), and (d). 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to alcohol 
consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. Four may be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, valuation, 
treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant consumed alcohol in violation of a treatment 
agreement he had with his state’s nursing board, which required him to abstain from 
alcohol consumption. That alcohol-related incident resulted in a three-month suspension 
of his nursing license and raised a trustworthiness concern under AG ¶ 22(a). The 
evidence does not raise trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(e), (f), or (g) because 
Applicant has not been diagnosed with an alcohol use disorder, or ordered by a court to 
abstain from consuming alcohol or undergo treatment. The only diagnosis in this record 
references opioid dependence. 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under this guideline. One may potentially apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment. 
 
Applicant has not consumed alcohol since December 2014, which is documented 
by his testimony and numerous urine screening since then. He acknowledged he made 
a mistake by consuming alcohol at his wife’s reunion and has no intention to drink alcohol 
in the future. The reunion was an unusual circumstance, and a similar incident is unlikely 
to recur given his continued successful participation in treatment for drug addiction and 
his commitment to remain abstinent. The evidence is sufficient to apply the above 
mitigating condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H and Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant developed a serious and lengthy addiction to Tramadol between 2000 
and 2008. He recognized his problem and voluntarily began recovery in September 2008 
by admitting himself into an inpatient treatment program. He continues participating in 
recovery, almost ten years later. Other than a one-time use of alcohol that occurred in 
December 2014, he has complied with the terms placed on him by his state’s nursing 
 
 
 
 
8 
board and his physician. After observing his demeanor and listening to his testimony, I 
found him to be candid and honest. He displayed remorse over his addiction and the 
ramifications it has had in his life. Given these facts, his physician’s positive assessment 
about his treatment progress, and his recent performance evaluation from his employer, 
it is unlikely that he will engage in similar conduct in the future. He is committed to 
recovery. Overall, the evidence does not raise doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a position of public trust.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
 
     Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraph 2.a:         For Applicant 
         Subparagraph 2.b:         For Applicant 
         Subparagraph 2.c:         For Applicant  
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a position of public 
trust. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
