 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 16-03122 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
May 9, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 21, 2014, Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On January 6, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant signed his Answer to the SOR (Answer) on February 22, 2017, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
June 5, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was 
provided to Applicant, who received the file on June 12, 2017.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted additional 
information in a timely fashion. Department Counsel had no objection to my considering 
the additional information, and the packet is admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibit 
A. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions2 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 and married with three children. He retired from the Army as a 
sergeant first class. He has been employed by a defense contractor since August 2014 
and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. (Item 3 at 
Sections 13A, 15, 17.) 
 
 
 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on August 6, 2015. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, 
or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation (ROI) 
summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
(See Executive Order 10865 § 5.) In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 4 is also cumulative. Applicant 
is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnote 1, which 
described the potential admissibility of Item 4. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially mitigating 
information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will 
be discussed later in this decision. 
 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with explanations. Those 
admissions are findings of fact. The total amount of money Applicant allegedly owes on 
all SOR-listed debts is approximately $39,434. The existence and amount of the debts 
is supported by statements in Applicant’s e-QIP, and by credit reports dated December 
4, 2014; and June 6, 2016. (Item 3 at Section 26, and Items 5 and 6.)  
 
 The status of the debts, based on record evidence including Applicant’s 
admissions and explanations, is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $9,755 for a past-due student loan. 
Applicant provided a chronology of his attempts to find the entities that are currently 
handling his student loan debt. He submitted documentation from two of them showing 
that he has just begun the process of consolidating his student loan debt. No further 
information was provided. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 1, 20-26.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $8,467 as the balance due on a 
repossessed automobile. Applicant submitted documentation showing that this debt was 
being paid pursuant to a garnishment. From November 2016 to June 2017 $4,612 had 
been paid to the creditor. No information was submitted showing the garnishment had 
been fulfilled. This debt is being resolved through garnishment. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2, 
33-51.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $5,880 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated that this debt would be paid pursuant to a settlement agreement 
starting in July 2017. He presented documentary evidence supporting that statement 
from his bank. I find Applicant has made a good-faith attempt to resolve this debt. This 
allegation is found for Applicant. (Applicant Exhibit A at 1-2, 16.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a tax lien in the amount of $572. Applicant 
provided documentary evidence showing the tax levy was paid through deductions from 
his military retirement pay. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 3, 27-32.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $7,888 for a past-due automobile loan. 
Applicant was able to find the current collection agent for this account, which is different 
from that stated on the SOR. He has made arrangements to pay $100 a month. 
Appellant submitted evidence from his bank showing that the first payment would be 
made on June 30, 2017. I find Applicant has made a good-faith attempt to resolve this 
debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. (Item 4 at 8; Applicant Exhibit A at 1-2, 13-
15.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $5,647 as the balance due on a 
repossessed automobile.  Applicant stated, “I went to the website got the number shown 
says the number is no longer in service will try by other means to contact this creditor.” 
No further information was provided. Based on the totality of the evidence, I find 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve this debt. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing $517 for a charged-off account. Applicant states he 
called the creditor, “spoke with [X] reference debt spoke with [Y] a manager and he said 
‘You have never been in our office there is nothing in our system and there is nothing he 
can do to assist me.’ And he hung up.” I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort 
to resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted that he owed $708 for a past-due telephone bill. Applicant 
stated that he contacted the collection agency set forth in the SOR, and was told the 
debt had been recalled by the original creditor. No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) 
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM: 
 
My debt has been accrued over several years of poor choices such as 
Gambling, bad investments, bad decision making, trying to afford what I 
could not, and trying to maintain a lifestyle that I thought would make 
others happy. This has been detrimental to me and has cost me greatly 
and has put me in the situation in which I find myself now. (Applicant 
Exhibit A at 1.) 
 
 Applicant submitted documentation showing that he had made payment 
arrangements with different collection agencies to resolve three additional debts that 
were not alleged in the SOR. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2, 17-19.) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had several past-due debts, as well as a tax lien, which he had not 
resolved. All three of these conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems have been in existence for many years. However, as 
further described below, Applicant has been diligently working to resolve his debts. AG 
¶ 20(a) has some application. 
 
 Applicant admits that his debt problems are due to his own conduct. He also 
showed, in Applicant Exhibit A, his actions to resolve his indebtedness. Applicant 
submitted evidence showing that he engaged in the time-consuming and frustrating 
business of following his debts through several collection agencies to find the one that is 
currently collecting his debts. He also submitted evidence showing that he has made 
payment arrangements with the creditors he has been able to find, and is beginning to 
fulfil them. In addition, the tax lien in the record has been resolved. AG ¶¶ 20 (d) and 20 
(g) have application in this case. 
 
 The DOHA Appeal Board has said, “An applicant is not required to show that [he] 
has completely paid off [his] indebtedness, only that [he] has established a reasonable 
plan to resolve [his] debts and has taken significant actions to implement that plan.”3 It is 
Applicant’s burden to show with sufficient evidence that he has mitigated the security 
concerns of his financial situation. He has done so, for the reasons set forth in this 
decision. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006.)) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was financially irresponsible in 
the past. His current conduct shows that he has learned his lesson and is now 
financially stable. Overall, the record evidence as described above leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   For Applicant 
     
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
