 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-03364 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/25/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On December 30, 2016, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued to her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
notarized on March 20, 2017, she admitted all allegations and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The 
Defense office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 
12, 2018, scheduling the case for March 9, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered six Exhibits (GE) 1-6, which were admitted into the 
record. Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented a binder of documents, which 
was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A with attachments. I held the record open and 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG has been revised for any adjudication 
on or after June 8, 2017. The revised AG is applied here. 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant submitted two documents, which were admitted as AE B and C without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 16, 2018. Based on my review of 
the record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. 
 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee for a defense contractor. She has been 
working as a contractor since 2007. She is single and has one young daughter. She is 
the sole provider for her child. Applicant attended college from 2004 until 2007, but did 
not obtain a bachelor’s degree. This is her first application for a position of public trust. 
(GE 1)  
 
Applicant explained that her financial troubles began in 2012 with the birth of her 
daughter. She does not receive any child support or health insurance, and her income 
was not sufficient to take care of her child and her normal expenses. (GE 5, Tr. 20) She 
did not receive paid maternity leave and was not employed for about three months. (Tr. 
21) She admitted that she was not as responsible as she should have been. However, 
she moved in with her parents to reduce her overall expenses.   
 
SOR 1.a is a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in April 10, 2014, which Applicant admits. 
She fell behind in her bills and was advised to file for bankruptcy. However, her student 
loans were not included in the bankruptcy. (GE 6) The bankruptcy was discharged in 
2014. 
 
SOR 1.b details an indebtedness to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes 
in the amount of $2,669.87 for tax year 2012. Applicant stated that she was not having 
sufficient tax withheld and at the time she did not have the money to pay the IRS. In 2014, 
she hired People’s Tax Relief. (Tr. 22) She paid the group about $5,000 to resolve the 
tax issue. She submitted tax transcripts that show she is in a not collectible status and 
the balance due is zero. Applicant qualified for a federal program and is cleared. (Tr. 22) 
She noted that if her income would change substantially, the status may change. (Tr. 27) 
 
SOR 1.c is for delinquent state taxes for the same tax year (2012) for $3,735. She 
presented documentation that she has been on a payment plan with the state. She pays 
$100 monthly in her payment plan. She has never missed a payment and has been 
making payments since April 2016. She provided documentation to support this claim. 
 
SOR 1.d to 1.f are student loans that were in collection. The total amount is 
approximately $5,300. She is in the process of consolidating the student loans, which 
could not be included in her 2014 bankruptcy. After she pays $105 monthly for three 
months, the loans will be consolidated. She submitted evidence of her first payment. 
 
 As to SOR 1.g, a charged-off account in the amount of $19,608 is a car loan, 
which is disputed. This was a used car purchased so that Applicant could get to work. 
 
 
 
 
3 
There were transmission issues. Applicant made monthly payments for six months. The 
vehicle was involuntarily repossessed. She contacted the law firm handling the case and 
the balance is about $13,748. She submitted documentation that she is making payments 
of $200 monthly. (AE ) 
 
SOR 1. h for a charged-off account in the amount of $7,168 that was included in 
the 2014 bankruptcy. Counsel stipulated that the bankruptcy schedule included that 
account. (Tr. 32) 
 
SOR 1. i, k, l, m and n are medical accounts. Applicant submitted documentation 
that she has paid a total of $180 for three of the medical accounts. The remaining two 
medical accounts for $654 and $437 are to be paid. SOR 1.n in the amount of $50 for a 
hospital bill is paid. She submitted documentation for her assertions. 
 
SOR 1.j for a charged-off account in the amount of $449 has been settled for $292 
and Applicant provided documentation.  
 
In addition to the above accounts, Applicant presented documentation that she has 
paid other non-SOR accounts. Her credit report reflects that she also satisfied a non-SOR 
judgment.  
 
Applicant is paying her bills. She is still living with her parents. She earns about 
$40,000 a year. She has also started to work part time to earn more income. (Tr. 36) The 
amount that she earns monthly varies. She pays rent to her parents in the amount of 
$500. Her next priority is to increase her savings. 
 
Applicant submitted two letters of reference. She is described as someone who 
started working at an early age and has had to learn many things from the various 
challenges in her life. She is paying her debts and now takes full responsibility. Applicant 
has an excellent rapport with her co-workers. 
 
Another letter from a co-worker who has known her for ten years writes that 
Applicant has risen through the ranks achieving promotions and accolades for her 
excellent service. She has been in a supervisory position for nine years.  She is one of 
the most reliable supervisors and is well respected by peers and management.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to protected information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
 
 
 
4 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive information will be 
resolved in favor of the national interest. In reaching this decision, I have only drawn 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence provided.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person seeking eligibility for a trustworthiness position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard protected information. Such 
decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination 
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned. 
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the concern under this guideline is that 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admits responsibility for all the delinquent debts at issue and the 
fact that she filed bankruptcy in 2014. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
             The financial matters at issue are for the most part resolved or in the process of 
being resolved. Applicant provided documentation of her efforts to pay and or settle her 
debts. She used a legal means in 2014 (bankruptcy) to resolve debts. She had a child in 
2012, which exacerbated any financial issues. She is a single mother and is supporting 
her daughter. She receives no child support. She took measures to reduce her living 
expenses by moving in with her parents.  Sufficient information about Applicant and her 
finances were provided to assess whether such delinquencies will again recur in the 
future. Applicant’s references to financial, medical, and student loans, and tax issues for 
the year of 2012, show that she acted responsibly at the time. She still has some debt, 
but is resolving it and has a plan. She does not need to have all of her debts paid. The 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended college 
for a number of years but did not obtain an undergraduate degree. She wanted to improve 
her work opportunities. As a result, she incurred student loans. She is a single parent of 
a five-year-old daughter. She lives with her parents. She filed for bankruptcy in 2014 as 
 
 
 
 
6 
a legal means to resolve debt. The student loans could not be included in the bankruptcy. 
She is in the process of consolidating them. She is now working two jobs and continues 
to pay her bills. She resolved her tax issues and the majority of her delinquent debt. She 
is on the right track.  
 
Applicant provided sufficient documentation to mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns raised in this case.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1n:   For Applicant   
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP position. 
Eligibility for access to protected information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH. 
Administrative Judge 
