KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant challenges a statement in the Judge’s analysis that certain circumstances
were within Applicant’s control.  As the Appeal Board previously stated, we do not consider
individual sentences in isolation when reviewing a decision.  When viewed in light of the
decision as a whole, the Judge’s statement that the identified circumstances were within
Applicant’s control was clearly a typographical or drafting error and is, therefore, harmless. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-04001
DATE: 05/17/2018
DATE: May 17, 2018
In Re:
----------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-04001
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
28, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On February 27, 2018, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Conclusions
The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling about $34,000.  The Judge
found that five of those debts are unresolved and, for some of them, noted that Applicant failed to
provide proof of payments.  The Judge concluded that there was no evidence that Applicant started
to address his debts seriously until he received the SOR and, while he recently began taking steps
to address his debts, he failed to establish a record of responsibly paying them and of managing his
finances.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges a statement in the Judge’s analysis that certain circumstances were
within Applicant’s control.  In this regard, the Judge stated:
Applicant presented evidence to establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).[1]  His
financial delinquencies arose as the result of experiencing periods of
underemployment and unemployment, and suffering a serious heart attack in 2010
for which he did not have medical insurance.  These were circumstances within his
control.  However, in order to establish full mitigation under this condition, he is
required to provide proof that he acted financially responsible under the
circumstances.  There is no evidence that Applicant started to seriously address his
debts until after receiving the  SOR.2  [Emphasis added.]
1 Directive, Encl 2, App A ¶ 20(b) states, “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death,
divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances[.]” 
2 Decision at 5.
2
As the Appeal Board previously stated, we do not consider individual sentences in isolation when
reviewing a decision.  See, e.g., ISCR 11-13664 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2013).   When viewed in
light of the decision as a whole and, more specifically, within the context of the quoted paragraph,
the Judge’s statement that the identified circumstances were within Applicant’s control was clearly
a typographical or drafting error and is, therefore, harmless.3  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-03795
at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2007). 
Applicant also contends that the Judge did not properly evaluate the mitigating and whole-
person evidence.  For example, he highlights that the nation was experiencing a recession at the time
in question, discusses the impact of his medical problem on his finances, and describes the efforts
he has taken to resolve his financial problems.  His arguments, however, do not rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
08-01616 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 7, 2009).  Additionally, the presence of some mitigating evidence does
not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A. ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3 We note that the first sentence in the quoted paragraph reflects that the Judge considered some evidence as
establishing circumstances beyond Applicant’s control under the first prong of ¶ 20(b).  Logically, the second sentence
would list the mitigating evidence referenced in the first sentence.  Additionally, the Judge characterized Applicant’s
heart attack as serious and, as a matter of common knowledge, individuals do not have control over their heart attacks. 
Furthermore, the placement of the word “however” in the quoted paragraph shows that the Judge was then proceeding
to contrast what she considered as mitigating evidence with other evidence pertaining to the second prong of ¶ 20(b),
i.e., the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  Given this context, it is clear the Judge considered
Applicant’s underemployment, unemployment, and medical problem as conditions beyond his control.  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
