 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-03478 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Although he mitigated the personal conduct concerns, 
he failed to mitigate the concerns raised by his history of financial problems, which 
includes unpaid federal and state tax debt and other delinquent accounts. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 11, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 19, 2017. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on April 25, 2017. He did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, has worked as a project manager for a federal contractor since 
June 2012. He completed a security clearance application, his first, in December 2015.  
He disclosed a delinquent home loan, which is alleged in the SOR (¶ 1.i). The ensuing 
investigation revealed additional derogatory financial information. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant failed to file federal and state income tax returns from 2003 to 2006 (SOR ¶ 
1.a – 1.h), and that he owes $45,924 in federal taxes (SOR ¶ 1.q) and $ 30,707 in state 
taxes (SOR ¶ 1.r), respectively. The SOR also alleges that Applicant owes $21,813 in 
other delinquent debt (SOR ¶¶ 1.j - 1.p, and 1.s - 1.w).3  
 
 Applicant claims that he began experiencing financial problems after he was laid 
off from his job of eight years in 2009. He remained unemployed for two years.  
According to Applicant, his income decreased from $68,000 to $25,000. During this 
period of unemployment, Applicant became delinquent on his mortgage and the bank 
initiated foreclosure proceedings. He admits that he and his wife did not file their 2003 
to 2006 federal and state income tax returns as alleged in the SOR. He does not explain 
why he failed to file the required income tax returns or pay the resulting income taxes. In 
the absence of the federal income tax returns, the IRS generated its own returns for 
Applicant and his wife separately and assessed income tax liabilities to each of them as 
single individuals.4 
 
 Applicant claims that some of the SOR debts have been resolved. He claims he 
and his wife have filed their outstanding  federal and state income tax returns using the 
married filing jointly status, which resolved their outstanding tax liabilities. However, the 
documentation Applicant provided does not support this statement. The IRS 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-6. 
 
4 GE 1, 6.  
 
3 
 
documentation provided relates only to Applicant’s wife. He did not provide any 
information on the status of the outstanding joint returns or the corresponding balances 
as alleged. He provided no documentation regarding the state tax liabilities. Applicant 
provided documentation that in January 2017 his mortgage company offered him a trial 
loan modification. Applicant did not provide any evidence he accepted the offer or 
complied with the terms of the agreement. Applicant provided documentation indicating 
that he was in the process of establishing recurring payments for SOR ¶¶ 1.k, and 1.s, 
but did not provide proof of payments. He states that he has resolved ¶¶ 1.p, 1.t, and 
1.v, and is disputing ¶ 1.m. However, he did not provide any documentation confirming 
resolution of the accounts or establishing legitimate basis for his debt dispute.5  
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his failure to 
file and pay his 2003 through 2006 federal and state taxes in addition to other alleged 
delinquent debts on his 2015 security clearance application. Applicant denies that he 
intentionally omitted his financial derogatory information from his security clearance 
application.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
                                                          
5 GE 2. 
 
6 GE 1, 6.  
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.7 
 
The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has a 
history of not meeting financial obligations as well as having an inability to do so.8 The 
record also establishes that Applicant failed to timely file his 2003 through 2006 federal 
and state income tax returns and to also timely pay the resulting tax liabilities.9 While 
Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused by events beyond his control, the 
loss of a job in 2009 followed by two years of unemployment, he failed to provide 
evidence that he acted responsibly in light of his circumstances. Applicant did not 
provide sufficient evidence to establish that his federal and state tax issues are 
resolved; that he has adhered good-faith effort to repay his creditors; or that he has a 
legitimate basis for disputing SOR ¶ 1.m. Applicant did not establish that he has 
received financial counseling or that his finances are under control. Accordingly, none of 
the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct, Guideline E 
 
Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.10 The 
SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose material facts about his 
finances on his December 2015 security clearance application. Applicant denied the 
allegation. Proof of omission, alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or 
state of mind when he completed the application. The record does not establish that 
Applicant intended to conceal adverse information from the Government. None of the 
personal conduct disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ongoing suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet his burden of production and 
persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. Applicant did not provide any 
evidence to show financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, Applicant’s request for 
access to classified information is denied.  
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
9 AG ¶ 19(f). 
 
10 AG ¶ 15. 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGANST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
