 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03996 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant made false statements to employers and made material omissions on 
his resume. He deliberately violated two employers’ policies against outside 
employment that could lead to a conflict of interest. At his hearing, Applicant continued 
to perpetuate his false statements. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
December 31, 2015. He was interviewed by a government investigator on January 16, 
2015, January 30, 2015, and October 27, 2016. After reviewing the information 
gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
an Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 25, 2017, alleging security concerns 
under Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline B (foreign influence). Applicant 
answered the SOR on October 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2018. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on April 6, 2018, scheduling a hearing for April 10, 2018. At the hearing, the 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified, presented the 
telephonic testimony of one witness, and submitted one exhibit (AE) 1, comprised of 
Tabs A through Q. All exhibits were admitted as evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 19, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw the Guideline B allegation 
with its two specifications (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b), stating that the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility had recently adjudicated that security concern in Applicant’s favor. 
(Tr. 8) I granted the motion as requested. 
 
Applicant, through his attorney, requested an expedited hearing. At hearing, he 
indicated he had sufficient time to prepare and was ready to proceed. He affirmatively 
waived his right to 15-day advanced notice. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant admitted that in July 2014, he was 
terminated from his employment with company T for violating its policy against 
maintaining a secondary employment that could create the appearance of a conflict of 
interest. He denied that he falsified his time cards. He admitted that in July 2014, he 
was terminated from his employment with company P for falsifying or making material 
omissions on a company record, and that he violated the company’s policy against 
maintaining a secondary employment that could create a conflict of interest. (SOR ¶ 
1.b) However, Applicant claimed he was unaware that both companies had policies 
preventing employees from engaging in outside work. 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations and at his hearing are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
and having considered Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He has been offered employment by a federal 
contractor conditioned on his eligibility to hold a clearance. He graduated from high 
school in 1994, and received a bachelor’s degree (computer science major and a minor 
in business and information system) in 1998. He is currently working on his master’s 
degree and anticipates completing it in 2019. Applicant married in 1998, and has two 
children, ages 18 and 11.  
 
Applicant started working for federal contractors in February 2001. Since then, he 
has worked for nine different federal contractors in Information Technology (IT) 
positions such as software engineer, computer applications development, and portal 
administrator. He has extensive training and IT certifications on numerous operating 
systems, databases, programing languages, application servers’ development and 
design, content management, and cloud computing. Applicant received access to 
 
3 
 
 
confidential information in 2007. He was granted a secret clearance in 2012, which was 
upgraded to a top-secret clearance in 2014.  
 
Applicant was hired by federal contractor T on May 19, 2014. He attended new 
hire orientation, received a badge, and was asked to read and sign the company’s 
policies brochure. Shortly thereafter, company T requested Applicant be processed for a 
clearance. Applicant explained he was disappointed by company T because he was 
under the understanding that he was hired to work a position that required a top-secret 
clearance. He believed T was not going to assign him to such a position, and he was 
concerned he would lose his top-secret clearance. Applicant then sought employment 
with company P for a position requiring a top-secret clearance. 
 
Applicant was hired by company P on June 16, 2014, to work on a position 
requiring a top-secret clearance. He attended new hire orientation, was issued a badge, 
and was asked to read and sign the company’s policies internet brochure. Company P 
requested that Applicant be processed for a clearance. Applicant was not allowed to 
work in any classified projects because his clearance needed to be transferred to his 
new position. Applicant received training and worked on unclassified projects for both 
companies for a period. He found the training and experience at company T very 
valuable. He also enjoyed earning two salaries for a short period. 
 
Applicant continued to work for both companies concurrently. He was charging 
company T 80 hours a pay period and charging company P 40 hours a week. Security 
officers noticed dual requests for clearances for Applicant by two different federal 
contractors. They started an investigation and notified the companies’ security officers. 
On July 24, 2014, Applicant’s manager at company T asked Applicant whether he was 
working for company P. Applicant lied to his manager at company T, and told him that 
he had not heard back from company P and that he had no plans to work for them.  
 
Company T confirmed Applicant’s employment for company P and fired him on 
July 25, 2014. On that day, Applicant left company T at noon and went to work for 
company P. He charged company T ten hours in his time card, and eight hours on his 
company P time card. Applicant denied he falsified any time cards at company T. He 
averred that he was putting in 16-hour days to finish his tasks for both employers. He 
noted that for most of the two-week period in question, he was on vacation in another 
state and in a foreign country.   
 
Applicant was confronted by company P personnel about whether he was 
working for company T on July 25, 2014. Applicant asked to resign from company P. On 
July 25, 2014, company P issued Applicant a “Notification of Termination” stating that 
his employment was terminated because he violated the company’s conflict of interest 
policy (maintaining a secondary employment), and for falsifying or making a material 
omission on a company record or resume. 
 
Applicant claimed he was unware that both companies had policies that 
prevented second jobs with companies that could create the appearance of a conflict of 
 
4 
 
 
interest. He acknowledged that he should have read both companies’ policies and 
should have disclosed his employment situation to both employers. He took 
responsibility for not disclosing his outside employment to both employers and for 
violating the companies’ policies. Applicant believes that he already paid the price for 
his actions when he was fired from both companies. Applicant further believes that 
these incidents are mitigated through the passage of time and his otherwise successful 
19-year career working for government contractors. 
 
Applicant is considered to be a valuable employee, who is honest, and 
trustworthy. He is technically proficient, dedicated, and willing to go the extra mile to get 
the job done. His references consider him to be security conscious and a person that 
follows rules and regulations. They recommended his eligibility for a clearance without 
reservations. Applicant’s performance appraisals indicate he mostly exceeds 
expectations. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), 
implemented by the Director of National Intelligence, Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, which are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 
2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.  
 
  In July 2014, Applicant violated two federal contractors’ policies prohibiting their 
employees from having outside employment that could give the appearance of or cause 
a conflict of interest. He also made a false statement and omitted information from at 
least one of the federal contractor’s documents when he failed to reveal his employment 
by other federal contractor. Applicant’s omission, if deliberate, would trigger the 
applicability the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
 
6 
 
 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations . . . .  
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
age, education, work experience, and his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I find 
that Applicant deliberately made a false statement concerning his concurrent 
employment with two federal contractors with the intent to mislead the federal 
contractor. I also find that he deliberately violated the two federal contractors’ policies 
against outside employment. The above disqualifying conditions are raised by the 
evidence and are applicable. Additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. 
He claimed that he was not aware that both federal contractors had policies against 
outside employment. His claims lack credibility for several reasons. IT is a very 
competitive field in which companies zealously protect their trade secrets, processes, 
and proprietary information. While in college, Applicant completed a major in computer 
science and a minor in business and information systems. Likely, he was made aware 
of employees having to sign nondisclosure, noncompetitive agreements, and conflict of 
interest policies as part of the IT businesses’ practices. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant started working for federal contractors in 2001. Since then, he has 
worked for nine different federal contractors in several IT positions. He has extensive 
training and IT certifications on numerous operating systems, databases, and 
programing languages. He received access to confidential information in 2007, and was 
granted a secret clearance in 2012, which was upgraded to a top-secret clearance in 
2014. It is likely that during his education, extensive training, certification process, and 
experience working in the IT field he became aware of the conflict of interest policies 
enforced by many companies. 
 Applicant’s knowledge of the companies’ conflict of interest policies is 
demonstrated by his false statements to both companies’ personnel to cover his outside 
employment. A manager of company T asked Applicant whether he was working for 
company P in July 2014. Applicant lied to his manager and told him that he had not 
heard back from company P and that he had no plans to work for them. At the time, he 
was working full-time for both companies. Applicant lied because he was aware of 
company’s T policy against outside employment. 
 Additionally, Applicant made a false statement and made material omissions on 
company documents submitted to company P. He failed to disclose his then full-time 
employment with company T. When confronted by company P personnel about whether 
he was working for company T, Applicant asked to resign and he was terminated on 
July 25, 2014.  
 At his hearing, Applicant continued to claim that he had not been aware of both 
employers’ policies against outside employment and conflict of interest. His testimony 
lacks credibility and diminishes the weight of his other mitigating evidence. Considering 
the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline E security 
concerns. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has 19 years’ experience working for federal contractors. He has had 
access to classified information since 2007. Based on his references’ statements, 
Applicant is a valuable employee, and is honest, and trustworthy. He is technically 
proficient, dedicated, and willing to go the extra mile to get the job done. His references 
consider him to be security conscious and a person that follows rules and regulations. 
They recommended his eligibility for a clearance without reservations. Applicant’s 
performance appraisals indicate he mostly exceeds expectations. 
 
8 
 
 
 The rationale and factors for denying his clearance eligibility are more 
substantial. Applicant made a false statement and made material omissions in 
documents submitted to a prospective employer. He failed to disclose his then full-time 
employment with another company. Applicant deliberately violated the policies of his 
two employers against outside employment that could lead to a conflict of interest. 
 At his hearing, Applicant continued to claim that he had not been aware of both 
employers’ policies against outside employment. His testimony lacks credibility and 
diminishes the weight of his other mitigating evidence. Moreover, Applicant’s failure to 
acknowledge his wrong behavior, and his repeated falsifications to cover his behavior, 
demonstrate that his questionable behavior may recur. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    WITHDRAWN  
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   WITHDRAWN 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
