 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-03371  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns, resulting 
from unfiled Federal income tax returns and delinquent consumer debts. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued 
after that date.1  
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2017, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
On March 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on March 30, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response 
to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to another administrative judge on October 1, 2017, and re-assigned 
it to me on May 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married. He has one child. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2010. He has worked for defense contractors since 2011. (Item 2) 
 
 On March 3, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it, he disclosed that he failed to timely file Federal income tax returns for 2012, 2013, and 
2014. He noted that he did not have enough money to pay his 2012 and 2013 taxes. He 
stated that he and his wife scheduled a meeting with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
to resolve these issues. He also disclosed three delinquent consumer debts and stated 
that he arranged monthly payments to resolve them. (Item 2)  
 
 During a June 21, 2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
discussed his unfiled Federal tax returns. He did not file his 2012 and 2013 Federal tax 
returns because he thought he would receive a refund. In December 2015, he filed his 
2014 Federal income tax return, but it was rejected by the IRS in accordance with an IRS 
rule. He claimed he paid all three delinquent consumer debts. (Item 3) 
 
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 
2011 and March 2014, the SOR contained six allegations, including three relating to 
taxes, and three consumer debts. The allegations arose between 2012 and 2016. (Item 
2, Item 4, Item 5)  
 
 In his February 2017 Answer, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. He stated 
that his financial problems arose because he was unemployed and underemployed for a 
period of time. (Item 1) Applicant said that the three debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.d for $471; 
SOR ¶ 1.e for $463; and SOR ¶ 1.f for $184, have been “cleared up” (Item 2) He submitted 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 
8, 2017. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
proof of payment of the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d for $471, but not for the other two. (Item 
1) 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. 
He did not provide a budget or other information related to his financial obligations from 
which to determine his current financial reliability and adherence to his legal responsibility 
to timely file Federal income tax returns. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet his financial and legal 
obligations, which began in 2012 and continues to date. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. They are as follows: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under any of the above 
mitigating conditions. Applicant’s Federal income tax returns for 2012, 2013, and 2014 
are not filed, and he did not submit proof that he paid two consumer debts. The financial 
issues are ongoing. There is some evidence that unemployment and underemployment 
contributed to his financial problems, which may have resulted from circumstances 
beyond his control. However, he did not provide evidence that he has attempted to 
responsibly manage his financial obligations. There is no evidence that Applicant 
participated in credit counseling or that his financial problems are under control. He 
presented evidence that he paid one consumer debt, demonstrating some evidence of a 
good-faith effort to resolve that debt. Although he mentioned in his March 2016 SCA that 
he was meeting with the IRS to resolve his tax problems, he did not submit any documents 
 
 
6 
 
 
indicating that his Federal tax issues are, or are being, resolved through an arrangement 
with the IRS.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and a circumstance surrounding this case, including those discussed in 
the analysis of the Guideline F.  
 
Applicant is a mature and educated individual. In December 2016, the SOR 
informed him that his unfiled Federal income tax returns and delinquent debts created 
security concerns. After submitting an Answer to the SOR, the Government’s FORM 
notified that he did not submit sufficient information to mitigate the financial allegations. It 
gave him more time to provide pertinent documentation. Despite that notice, he did not 
submit additional evidence to prove that he addressed the financial security concerns, 
including proof of payment of two debts he said he paid. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.f:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
