 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01214 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations’ trustworthiness concerns 
related to his unfiled Federal and state income tax returns, and failure to make timely 
payments of his state income taxes, resulting in tax liens. National security eligibility for a 
position of public trust is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On August 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on September 6, 2016, and requested a hearing (Answer).   
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
January 11, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 12, 2018, setting the 
hearing for January 31, 2018. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-1 through A-10, B-1 through B-3, and C-1, D-1 and D-2. All exhibits were admitted 
without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 7, 2018. The 
 
 
 
 
2 
record remained open until February 23, 2018, for the submission of additional exhibits. 
That date was extended for 30 days. Applicant timely submitted AE E, consisting of six 
pages, which I admitted without objection. 
 
                                                     Procedural Ruling 
 
 Based on the evidence presented during the hearing, Department Counsel moved 
to amend the SOR at the end of the hearing, prior to closing arguments.1 The 
amendments are as follows: 
 
1. To add the year 2014 to SOR ¶ 1.a, such that the allegation will read as follows: 
 
You failed to file your Federal tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, 
2012, 2013, and 2014 as required by law. As of the date of this 
Statement of Reasons, your tax returns remain unfiled. 
 
2. To add additional language to SOR ¶ 1.c, such that the allegation will read as 
follows: 
 
You failed to file your Pennsylvania tax returns for tax years 2009 
through 2014, and Wisconsin state tax return for tax year 2014, as 
required by law. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, your tax 
returns remain unfiled. 
 
Applicant did not object and the motion was granted. (Tr. 53) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He became licensed as a dentist in 1982. He and his 
wife separated in 2011, filed for divorce in 2012, and were divorced in October 2016. They 
had been married for 30 years. From 1982 to 1996, he owned a private practice. He then 
taught dentistry at a university and started a company that provided services to military 
members through a defense contractor. While working for that company, he provided 
services in several states. In December 2014, he sold that business to the contractor and 
became an employee. (Tr. 26-31, 37; GE 2) He has held an interim position of public trust 
since April 2015. (Tr. 31) 
 
 On December 23, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In it, he disclosed that he had not filed Federal income 
tax returns for years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. He noted that the returns were 
being prepared and unpaid taxes would be paid within 90 days. (GE 1). On February 9, 
2015, a government investigator interviewed him about information in his e-QIP, including 
                                            
1 DOD Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.17 permits Department Counsel to file a motion to amend the SOR at a 
hearing, in order to have it conform to the evidence admitted. Applicant did not object to the amendments 
or request additional time to prepare a response to the amendments. However, he was given over 50 days 
to submit post-hearing documents relative to all issues in the case.  
 
 
 
 
3 
his unfiled Federal and state tax returns for years 2009 through 2013. Applicant stated 
that he was waiting for his wife to sign the returns in order to file them. He again indicated 
that he would resolve the problems in 90 days, when the divorce proceeding was to be 
finalized. (GE 1, GE 2)  
 
 At this hearing, Applicant confirmed that he had not filed his amended 2007 and 
2008 Federal tax returns and he did not intend to file them because his former wife would 
not sign them. He decided to forfeit any refund. He filed his state taxes for those years. 
(Tr. 40-41) In a post-hearing submission, he stated that he was not required to file an 
amended return for those two years because he was entitled to a refund. (AE E) 
 
 Applicant testified that he had not filed his 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 
Federal or state income tax returns. He estimated that he owed $116,000 to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) for tax years 2009 through 2013. (Tr. 41-43; GE 1)  
 
 Applicant asserted that he has been unable to file the above listed returns because 
his former wife has refused to sign them, some of which had been prepared by his son, 
an accountant, before they separated or divorced. (Tr. 31-32, 35) After he moved out of 
the marital home, he no longer had access to tax documents or his computer. (Tr. 38) In 
hindsight, he admitted he should have filed separately for those years. (Tr. 32) 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted three cover sheets from Intuit TurboTax, dated 
April 12, 2016, February 21, 2017, and February 5, 2018, indicating that he filed Federal 
tax returns on those dates. None of the cover sheets reference a specific tax year; 
however, Applicant stated that they confirm he filed for 2015, 2016, and 2017, which are 
years not alleged in the SOR. (AE C, AE D, AE E) 
 
 In 2015, Applicant resolved the $950 corporate state tax lien filed in 2009 (SOR ¶ 
1.e). This lien was filed against his prior business for not timely filing all payroll forms for 
2007. (Tr. 32; AE E) In 2015, Applicant resolved the state tax liens filed in 2010 and 2011, 
in the amount of $2,104 and $1,941 (SOR ¶ 1.f and ¶ 1.g). (AE E-5) Both of those liens 
have the same court number. They do not appear on Applicant’s June 2016 or January 
2018 credit bureau reports. (GE 3, GE 4, and GE 5)  
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net monthly income is $9,540, and expenses, 
investments, and savings are about $8,870. (AE A-3) He has not participated in credit or 
budgetary counseling. He has discussed his finances with his son, an accountant. (Tr. 
35; AE A-2)  
 
 Applicant’s employer provided a letter of recommendation. He praised Applicant 
for his innovation in delivering dental services to members of the military. He considers 
Applicant to be a valued member of the company’s management team. (AE A-1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
The action in this case was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective within the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 2 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
                                            
2 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
5 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. Two may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to timely file Federal and state income tax returns 
beginning with year 2009 through 2014, as required by law. He failed to timely file an 
amended Federal tax return for 2007 or 2008. Three state liens were filed against him for 
non-payment of taxes. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. Five may be potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
 
 
 
6 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
To date, Applicant has not filed Federal or state income tax returns for years 2009 
through 2014. He asserted that he is not legally required to file Federal amended returns 
for 2007 and 2008, but did not provide a legal basis for that assertion. He resolved three 
tax liens. Applicant’s continued delay in complying with his legal duty to file six years of 
tax returns casts doubt on his current trustworthiness. The evidence establishes minimal 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) 
 
Applicant testified that he was unable to file the required tax returns because his 
former wife refused to sign them or provide him with necessary information. While that 
may have been a valid reason for not filing returns for a year or two, it is not a valid excuse 
for failing to file for six years. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and there are no 
indications that his financial legal obligations are control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
Applicant paid and resolved the three liens listed in the SOR, demonstrating some good-
faith effort to resolve those debts, under AG ¶ 20(d). He has not made arrangements with 
the IRS or state taxing agencies to file outstanding tax returns for years 2009 through 
2014, or his amended returns for 2007 or 2008. Nor has he established a payment plan 
for outstanding taxes for those years. The evidence does not establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
 
7 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is an educated and articulate individual, who has successfully provided 
dental services to military members since 1996, in both a private capacity and as an 
employee of a defense contractor. He was candid and forthright during his testimony. He 
expressed remorse over his failure to responsibly manage his legal obligations to file and 
pay taxes. These are positive factors in this case. 
 
However, several facts remain concerning. Applicant is an intelligent and mature 
man, who is aware of his legal obligation to timely file tax returns and pay outstanding 
taxes. In response to an inquiry in his December 2014 e-QIP about the status of his tax 
returns, he truthfully disclosed unfiled returns and outstanding taxes. He attributed the 
problem to issues with his soon-to-be former wife. He indicated he intended to address 
the problems within 90 days. Two months later, in February 2015, he discussed the 
problem with a government investigator and anticipated resolving the problems in 90 
days. That did not happen. In August 2016, he received the SOR that placed Applicant 
on notice that his unfiled tax returns and unpaid tax liens raised concerns regarding his 
application for a public trust position. In his September 2016 Answer, he acknowledged 
his unfiled returns. At the hearing, a year and a half later, and over one year after his 
divorce was finalized, he still has not filed six years of tax returns, nor resolved 
outstanding taxes pertinent to those years. His ongoing mismanagement of taxes is 
alarming. He has not established a solid record of compliance with a fundamental legal 
obligation to file taxes. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
 
 
 
 
8 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).3  
 
Overall, Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations. The evidence raises significant 
doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a public trust position.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant 
       Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.g:      For Applicant 
        
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a position of public 
trust. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
