KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board concludes the Judge’s material findings regarding the student loan are
based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could
be drawn from the record.  Applicant’s contention on appeal that the lender was not interested in
working with him on the student loans as far back as 2014 is not supported by the record
evidence.  The Judge correctly found that Applicant stated in his SOR Answer and FORM
Response that he was working with the lender to resolve the debt.  His FORM Response
indicated that he entered into a monthly repayment plan with the lender.  It was only after the
Judge asked Applicant to provide documentation of his continuing payments under that plan that
he stated he was having difficulty in dealing with the lender.  The Judge’s material findings of
security concern are sustainable. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03905.a1
DATE: 05/25/2018
DATE: May 25, 2018
In Re:
---------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03905
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 7, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested decision on
the written record.  On February 23, 2018, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Shari
Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In 2010, Applicant obtained his current job after experiencing almost two years of
unemployment.  He divorced in 2012 and married again in 2016.  He attributed his delinquent debts
to his divorce, his ex-wife’s addiction, and her failure to pay her debts as provided in their marital
settlement agreement.   
The SOR alleged five delinquent debts totaling about $100,000, including a student loan
charged off for about $60,000 in 2012.  The Judge found against Applicant on the student loan debt
and in favor of him on the other debts.  In his Answer to the SOR in February 2017, Applicant stated
he was working with an account representative on a plan to resolve the student loan and intended
to use his tax refund to pay it.  In responding to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material
(FORM) in April 2017, he provided copies of three checks totaling $800 that represented payments
made over the phone.  He was told he could settle the student loan for 33% but did not have money
available to do so.  He intended to continue to making payments.  
In early 2018, Applicant responded to the Judge’s inquiry about whether he had additional
documentation of payments on the student loan.  Applicant stated the creditor would allow him to
make payments on this charged-off debt, but would not provide him further information about the
debt.  Applicant stated that he contacted a student loan data system that could not located the debt,
and he did not know what else to do.  Absent further documentation, such as an IRS form confirming
the student loan’s cancellation, it remains unresolved.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s divorce and related-financial difficulties were circumstances beyond his control. 
He did not present clear indications that the student loan is under control.  He merits some, but not
full, mitigation credit for good-faith efforts to resolve four debts because he did not begin to address
them until after he received the SOR.  
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant submitted letters of reference that post-date the Judge’s
decision.  The Appeal Board is prohibited from considering such new evidence.  Directive E3.1.29. 
Additionally, we need not address Applicant’s assignments of error regarding SOR allegations that
the Judge found in his favor.  
Applicant is apparently challenging the Judge’s findings of fact regarding the student loan. 
In the appeal brief, he contends:
When finally able to pay on this [student loan] in 2014, I attempted to work with [the
lender] to develop a repayment plan; however, the bank was not interested as they
stated the loan had already been written off as a loss.  In my correspondence for
periodic review and subsequent submission, I made it clear the lender . . . would not
accept a payment plan from me, nor would the bank representative(s) share account
information with me, instead they reported they had no account information
matching my loan.  I found it impossible to manage and resolve this loan debt when
the bank itself was not willing or interested in working with me to develop a
reasonable re-payment plan.  I request that further consideration be made regarding
the reluctance of [the lender] to work with me to resolve my debt, and acknowledge
my continued attempts to do so.1
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes the Judge’s material findings regarding the student
loan are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that
could be drawn from the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant’s contention on appeal that the lender was not interested in working with him on the
student loans as far back as 2014 is not supported by the record evidence.  The Judge correctly found
that Applicant stated in his SOR Answer and FORM Response that he was working with the lender
to resolve the debt.  His FORM Response indicated that he entered into a monthly repayment plan
with the lender.  It was only after the Judge asked Applicant to provide documentation of his
continuing payments under that plan that he stated he was having difficulty in dealing with the
lender.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant highlights his resolution of four of the delinquent debts,
explains the reasons for his financial problems, and describes his efforts to resolve the student loan. 
These arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence and are
insufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A. ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
1  Appeal Brief at 2.  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
