                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
)     ISCR Case No.16-01789
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated October 15, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8,
2017.1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 9, 2017. A notice of hearing was issued on December 19,
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines became effective June 8, 2017. My decision and
formal findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.
1
2017, scheduling the hearing for February 23, 2018. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4
were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented one
witness and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-D. I kept the record open until April 4,
2018 for additional documentation. Applicant submitted a packet of documents, which
were marked as AX E, and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript
was received on March 5, 2018.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted six allegations in the SOR., which 
include failure to file and pay federal and state income tax returns. He provided
explanations for the allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
Applicant is a 52-year-old machinist for a defense contractor. He is divorced and
has one daughter. He graduated from high school in 1984 and attended college, but did
not obtain a degree. He worked as a civilian for the U.S. Navy in high school and
traveled to various locations. (Tr. 14) He has worked as a contractor since 2015. 
Applicant completed his first security clearance application (SCA)  in June 2015. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges five delinquent accounts. Applicant has paid the following
debts: SOR 1.d and 1.g. (AX A and B) He provided documentation at the hearing. He is
current with his home mortgage (SOR 1.a). Counsel stipulated that according to the
latest credit report, Applicant is correct. As to SOR 1.b, a home equity loan in the
amount of $2,082, Applicant presented post-hearing documentation that he is in a
payment plan with the bank. (AX E), and is current. He pays between $100 and $175 a
month and has been doing so since September 2017. (Tr. 26) As to SOR 1.c, a past-
due amount of $152 on a car loan. Applicant stated that he made his car loan payment
recently. 
The remaining SOR allegations concern the following: SOR 1.e, a state tax lien
for $4,761 entered in 2015; SOR 1.f, a Federal tax lien from 2013 in the amount of
$59,114; SOR 1.h, failure to file Federal tax returns, as required, for tax years 2007
through 2014; SOR 1.I, failure to file state tax returns, as required for tax years 2007
through 2014. Applicant admitted these allegations and presented a letter from his CPA
stating that the 2016 and 2017 federal and state tax returns are completed. (AX C).
Applicant’s explanation for the delinquent debts include a divorce in 2005, self-
employment from 2007 until 2010 with little or no income. In addition, Applicant has
many health issues, which he documented. (AX E) Applicant incurred many medical
bills, for which he paid about $8,000. He explained that he sold many large and small
personal items to keep paying his daily bills. He believed that because he was not
earning much money, he did not have to file tax returns. (Tr. 36, 50)
2
Applicant maintains that his finances were fine before the divorce in 2005. His
wife left the home and Applicant cared for his daughter. When they divorced, Applicant
suffered monetary hardships. He lost all of his savings and his retirement fund.  (Tr. 53)
He has had steady work since 2015. He earns about $76,000 a year. He also
subsidizes his income through a small repair business. (Tr. 41) He submitted a budget
as a post-hearing document. His net monthly remainder is about $148. (AX) E He was
proud to note that he sent his daughter to college for two years. (Tr. 42) 
Applicant’s CPA prepared his 2016 and 2017 Federal and State tax returns.
Applicant submitted copies of them post-hearing. It is not clear whether they have been
electronically filed. According to the completed tax forms, Applicant will receive a refund
of $1,945 from the state, and a Federal refund of $6,928. These are for the 2016 tax
year. For tax year 2017, Applicant is due a Federal refund of $5,783 and a state refund
of $1,508. The summary on the front of the forms state that the returns will be
electronically filed and the refunds will be deposited into Applicant’s account. (AX E)
Applicant stated that the 2015 tax returns would be completed next.
As to the federal state tax lien, Applicant disputed the amount and stated that
they have him confused with someone else. He called the IRS, but there has been no
resolution.
Applicant’s witness, a Government supervisor, has known Applicant for ten
years. At this time, Applicant does not handle any sensitive information. He is aware of
Applicant’s financial issues, but recommends him for a security clearance. He
described Applicant as a very hard worker, trustworthy, and dependable. (Tr. 61)
  Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
3
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual  Federal, state, or local income
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required;
The Government produced credible evidence to establish the delinquent debts
and the failure to file federal and state tax returns from 2007 to 2014. Consequently, the
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(f).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
5
(g) the individual has made arrangement with the appropriate tax authority to file
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.
Applicant had circumstances beyond his control in terms of unemployment,
divorce, downturn in economy and many medical issues. He paid the smaller debts and
is now current with his home mortgages. He has been working steadily since 2015 and
still has some delinquent debt. Applicant provided for his daughter when his wife left and
he sent his daughter to college. He could not maintain his expenses. He used his
savings and retirement money. He lives frugally. He produced documentation about the
debts he has paid. He has received some financial counseling.  Mitigating condition  AG
¶ 20(b), (c), and (d) apply in part. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.
 Applicant incurred financial debt and has not filed his federal and state returns
for many years. He has a Federal and state tax lien which he wants to resolve but this
has not yet occurred. He did not file his Federal or State taxes for many years. He has
recently had his CPA complete the forms for 2016 and 2017. It appears that he will be
getting refunds. It is not clear if they have been electronically filed. He has not started on
the 2015 tax returns yet. Applicant now has steady employment and earns about
$76,000  a year.  However, he has not met his burden to mitigate the financial security
concerns in this case.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(d)
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He was divorced in 2005 and sufffered financial
hardship. He provided for his daughter. He was self-employed for some years, but did
6
not make much income. He used his savings and retirement to keep afloat. However, he
has been in steady employment since 2015. He has paid smaller debts and is current
with his mortgages. He had circumstances beyond his control.
However, as to his failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns for many
years and his Federal and state tax liens he has just recently begun to address the
issues. He did obtain the services of a CPA and the 2016 and 2017 forms have been
completed. It does appear that he will receive refunds. The 2015 tax return will be
tackled next. He still has the Federal and state tax liens to address.  He is on the right
track. He has good intentions and intends to pay all debts and file his returns. Despite
promises and good intentions, the issues are not resolved.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F. Accordingly, I
conclude that he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e-f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.h-I: Against Applicant  
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
8
