1 
 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 16-00370 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schacter, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Although Applicant has made progress towards reducing his delinquencies, it is too 
soon to conclude that he has mitigated the financial considerations security concern given 
the nature of the delinquencies and the amount outstanding. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national interests of national security to grant security clearance 
eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
On July 6, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting subparagraphs 1.a and 
1.b, and denying subparagraphs 1.c through 1.p.  He requested a hearing. On August 16, 
2016, Department Counsel filed an amended SOR, adding subparagraphs 1.r through 
1.cc. On September 25, 2016, Applicant answered the amended SOR, admitting 
subparagraphs 1.r through 1.z, and denying 1.aa through 1.cc.  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. On September 18, 2017, DOHA 
scheduled the hearing for November 8, 2017. On November 3, 2017, Department Counsel 
moved to amend the SOR again, withdrawing subparagraphs 1.s through 1.v, and adding 
subparagraphs 1.dd through 1.mm. Later that day, Applicant’s counsel e-mailed a denial of 
the motion to amend the SOR. On November 6, 2017, I granted the second motion to 
amend the SOR, and continued the hearing, rescheduling it to January 25, 2018, to allow 
Applicant an opportunity to prepare a response to the new allegations. Applicant admitted 
all of the allegations in the second amended SOR. (Tr. 8) 
 
The hearing was held as rescheduled. I received 20 Government exhibits (GE 1 
through GE 20), and 27 Applicant exhibits (AE A through AA). Also, I took administrative 
notice of two spreadsheets Department Counsel submitted, summarizing her argument 
(HE I and II), and a copy of Department Counsel’s discovery letter mailed to Applicant on 
August 16, 2016. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s counsel’s 
request, to afford him the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, 
he submitted 23 additional exhibits that I marked as AE BB through AE XX. DOHA 
received the transcript on February 2, 2018. 
 
Preliminary Rulings 
 
 1. Applicant satisfied the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.c through 1.i, 1.k 
through1.q, and 1.bb through 1.cc. (Answer; HE I, HE II) I resolve these in Applicant’s 
favor. 
 
   2. Although SOR pleadings need not be drafted with the specificity required for 
criminal pleadings, they must, at minimum, be specific enough to enable applicants to 
prepare a response. SOR subparagraph 1.j, which alleges a medical debt owed to an 
unidentified creditor does not meet this threshold. In light of Applicant’s denial, I resolve 
this allegation in his favor. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old man with three children, ages 16, 14, and 12. He and his 
wife are separated. He is a high school graduate who has taken multiple college courses. 
From 1996 to 2004, Applicant worked for various state agencies and private companies as 
a corrections officer. (AE A at 4-6) Since then, he has been working as a federal 
government contractor providing corrections, law enforcement services and counseling in 
“hostile and austere environments” in support of U.S. government initiatives. (AE A at 3)  
 
3 
 
 Applicant is highly respected by his colleagues. (AE B) According to a former 
supervisor, his morals and ethics are above reproach. (AE B at 3) He is active in multiple 
charitable organizations. (Tr. 46)  
 
 Applicant has a history of not timely filing his federal income tax returns or not 
paying his income tax debts on time, beginning in 2008 when he incurred late fees and 
penalties of $400. (AE C1 at 4) He filed his 2010 income tax return in November 2012, 
exceeding the extension date the IRS had granted him by more than a year and incurring 
penalties of more than $40,000. (AE C1 at 9) He was penalized approximately $700 for 
paying his income taxes late for tax year 2011, and approximately $800 of penalties for 
filing his 2012 income tax return late. (AE C1 at 12-15) Applicant’s delinquent tax debts led 
to the issuance of multiple liens against his property between 2013 and 2015, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d.   
 
 In 2010, Applicant started a business and structured it as a limited liability company. 
(Tr. 138)  Initially it was successful. At its peak, he employed 50 to 60 people and worked 
with 50 subcontractors. (Tr. 58) In 2011, Applicant procured a contract to provide security 
for convoys moving supplies through a war zone and another contract to provide law 
enforcement advice to foreign nationals in the same war zone. In 2012, the federal 
program that managed such contracts came under Congressional scrutiny. (Tr. 52, 83) 
During this period, the government temporarily stopped paying the contractors. 
Consequently, Applicant lost more than a million dollars of revenue. Although Applicant 
attempted to recoup his losses through settlement negotiations and litigation, his efforts 
have been unsuccessful, thus far. (Answer at 2) 
 
 Subsequently, Applicant’s business and personal finances began worsening, as he 
struggled to pay overhead expenses and meet payroll. Moreover, at or about this time, 
Applicant experienced serious medical problems that required several major surgeries. 
(Answer at 3) Faced with dissolving the company or filing for bankruptcy protection, 
Applicant chose to keep his company afloat by paying corporate expenses using his 
employees’ money held in trust fund accounts (Tr. 63; Tr. 124) By 2015, Applicant owed 
approximately $1.5 million of delinquent federal personal and corporate income taxes for 
tax years 2012 through 2015. (Amended Answer at 1) This amount included multiple late 
fees and civil penalties, as alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.ee - 1.mm. (Answer to 
Amended SOR at 1); Answer to Second Amended SOR at 1-2).  
 
 In addition to not paying his employees’ federal taxes, Applicant did not pay taxes 
held in trust and owed to his employees’ respective states of residence. (Tr. 121) This 
generated a debt of approximately $200,000 to four state revenue authorities, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.c, and 1.w through 1.aa. (Answer to Amended SOR at 2-3; Tr. 121)  
 
 Applicant incurred $140,000 of commercial debt and medical bills, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.e through 1.i, 1.k through1.q, 1.bb and 1.cc. By 2015, Applicant’s 
financial situation began improving, enabling him to focus on debt reduction. He either 
satisfied or disputed all of the commercial and medical debts. (See Preliminary Ruling, 
4 
 
above) In addition, in September 2015, he began to make $15,000 monthly payments 
towards the satisfaction of his corporate income tax through an installment plan. (AE M) 
 
 By September 2016, Applicant had made approximately $225,000 of federal and 
state income tax payments. (Tr. 125) Applicant’s business experienced another financial 
downturn after difficulties with another one of his government contracts led to major 
revenue loss. (Tr. 70, 131) This rendered him unable to continue complying with the IRS 
installment agreement. Applicant’s efforts at renegotiating the installment agreement were 
unsuccessful. 
 
 Since January 2017, Applicant has been making sporadic payments towards his 
federal income tax delinquency, but they have been “nowhere near the $15,000 payments” 
that he was making before his most recent business downturn. (Tr. 126) Applicant has 
satisfied state revenue tax delinquencies, alleged in subparagraphs 1.c, totaling $4,267, 
and 1.y, totaling $687. (Answer at 9: AE LL)  He satisfied a $17,537 state tax lien, as 
alleged in 1.x, through a wage garnishment. (AE X)  
  
 In February 2016, Applicant completed a financial management course. (AE R) He 
has also retained a company that helps individuals and businesses resolve their tax 
liabilities. (AE Z) Through this company, Applicant is negotiating an installment agreement 
and seeking an abatement of some of the penalties he incurred. Per a representative from 
the company, all of Applicant’s income tax filings are up to date. He owes the IRS 
approximately $1.2 million, and a state revenue authority $14,500. His business owes the 
IRS approximately $1.3 million, and approximately $54,000 to two state revenue 
authorities. (AE BB) Applicant’s business no longer employs anyone; therefore, he has not 
been generating any employee payroll tax liability. (Tr. 126) In 2016, he earned 
approximately $62,000. (AE BB) During the peak years of his business, he earned up to 
$250,000 annually. (Tr. 119)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
6 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations” and AG ¶ 19(f), “. . . failure to pay annual federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems occurred after his business began struggling at or 
about the time he suffered a medical condition that required multiple surgeries. Once his 
business improved, Applicant began paying his commercial debts and addressing his tax 
delinquencies, contacting the IRS and relevant state taxing authorities, and developing 
installment agreements. He made significant progress at debt reduction before another 
major business downturn compelled him to stop making payments towards his federal 
income tax installment plan. 
 
 Conversely, Applicant’s history of filing his income tax returns late and failing to pay 
them on time, incurring penalties, predated his business struggles. Moreover, Applicant’s 
voluntary, intentional decision to pay his other creditors and his overhead expenses rather 
than the money held in escrow for his employees’ taxes was a serious transgression. 
Specifically, payroll taxes withheld from one’s employees does not belong to the company 
or the employees. Rather, it belongs to, and is held in trust for the government. (26 U.S. 
Code § 6672) Using this money for purposes that serve the business rather than remitting 
the money to the government constitutes a violation of the trust the government has that 
the money that the employer holds in escrow will be paid for the respective employees. 
7 
 
(See, Godfrey v. U.S., 748 F. 2d 1568, 1575-1576 (Fed. Cir. 1984)) Consequently, 
although significant circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial 
problems, he did not act responsibly under the circumstances, rendering AG ¶ 20(b) only 
partially applicable. 
  
 Applicant has satisfied all of his commercial delinquencies alleged in the SOR 
totaling in excess of $140,000, together with the state tax delinquencies alleged in 1.c, 1.x, 
and 1.y. Although he has retained a company to help him either pay or otherwise resolve 
his tax delinquency, there is no evidence that this company is providing counseling 
services. AG(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has filed all of his income tax returns, and his tax consultant is negotiating 
a plan to satisfy his tax debt. AG ¶ 20(g) applies. Applicant’s efforts at debt reduction 
before his second business downturn and his retaining of a tax consultant constitute good-
faith efforts to resolve his debts, triggering the first prong of AG ¶ 20(d). Although 
Applicant’s tax consultant is working on a debt reduction plan, no plan is currently in place. 
Consequently, AG ¶ 20(d) is only partially applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Applicant deserves credit for his community involvement. The struggles of his 
business were beyond his control. However, his decision to forego paying income and 
payroll taxes has extremely serious security significance as it indicates that he may “have a 
problem abiding by well-established rules and regulations.” (ISCR Case No. 15-01031 
(June 15, 2016) at 4)  
 
 Applicant has made demonstrable progress in satisfying delinquencies, satisfying all 
of the commercial delinquencies and four of the state income tax delinquencies. However, 
his remaining tax delinquencies total more than $2.5 million, and he is still in the process of 
developing a plan to resolve them. Consequently, the nature and seriousness of the 
problem, together with the length of time that the income tax delinquencies have been 
outstanding and their recurrent nature, outweigh the positive security significance of the 
favorable evidence and the circumstances that were beyond Applicant’s control. Under 
these circumstances, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against  Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.q:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.s-1.v:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 1.w:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.x-1.y:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.z:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.aa-1.cc:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.dd-1.mm:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
