 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02029 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign security concerns pertaining to Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and B (foreign influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines C and B. 
On December 16, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On October 4, 2017, The Government submitted its written case. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 18, 2017. He 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any additional information within the 
30-day period. On January 16, 2018, the case was assigned to me. The Government 
exhibits, marked as Items 1 through 9, are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on 
or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Iraq and Syria 
with six and eight attachments, respectively. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-
02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Applicant did not object to 
me taking administrative notice of the proffered documents. Department Counsel’s 
request for administrative notice is granted. The “Iraq” and “Syria” sections are quoted 
from Department Counsel’s administrative notice request (bullet symbols and internal 
footnotes are omitted). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations, except SOR ¶ 
2.e, which he denied, with an explanation. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 67-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since 
January 2015. (Item 3) He seeks a security clearance as a requirement of his 
employment. 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq in 1950. He immigrated to the United States in April 
1976, as an Iraqi refugee sponsored by the World Council of Churches. He left Iraq 
because he was persecuted as an Assyrian and Christian. Approximately, two years 
                                            
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
after arriving in the United States, Applicant obtained his permanent residency (green 
card). In 1982, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant was issued his most 
recent U.S. passport in 2008, which expires in 2018. (Items 3, 4)  
 
Applicant married his first wife, a native-born Iraqi, in 1975, and divorced her in 
2010. His former spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant married his current wife, 
a native-born Syrian, in 2010. His current wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2007. (Items 3, 5) Of note, at the time this FORM was prepared, Applicant’s wife was 
working as a linguist for a defense contractor in Iraq. (Item 4) A breakdown of 
Applicant’s family members, in-laws, former in-laws, and extended family is discussed 
further under Foreign Influence, below. 
 
The FORM does not contain any information regarding Applicant’s education in 
Iraq before he immigrated to the United States. After arriving in the United States, he 
was awarded an electronics technician certificate in 1981 from a university and an 
electronics certificate in 1984 from a community college. Applicant received his real 
estate license in 1991 that he renews every two years. (Item 5) 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 Alleged under this concern are two occasions when Applicant used his Iraqi 
citizenship to vote in Parliamentary elections in 2005 and 2008.3 He voted in a remote 
polling center located in the United States using his U.S. passport as identification that 
states he was born in Iraq. (Items 2, 4) At the time Applicant voted in 2005 and 2008, he 
did not hold a security clearance nor was he aware that voting in an Iraqi election would 
have jeopardized his future security clearance eligibility. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Alleged under this concern is Applicant’s membership in the Assyrian Democratic 
Movement, an Iraqi-based organization, and that Applicant provided financial support to 
his local chapter of the Assyrian Aid Society, an organization that provides humanitarian 
aid to the Assyrian people in Iraq. Applicant does not dispute either of these allegations 
adding that the Assyrian Democratic Movement is a peaceful Christian group supportive 
of the United States. The money he donated to the Assyrian Aid Society “help[s] needy 
Christians of Iraq, with food and basic needs of life.” (Item 2) The Government’s 
evidence does not rebut or challenge these assertions. (Items 8, 9) 
 
 Further alleged is that Applicant provided approximately $1,000 in financial 
support to his sister-in-law, a resident citizen of Syria. Applicant does not dispute this 
explaining that he did so for humanitarian reasons to help her with the basic needs of 
food and shelter. His sister-in-law is a homemaker and is not affiliated with the Syrian 
government. Applicant estimates that his contact with his sister-in-law is limited to 
approximately three times a year by telephone. (Items 2, 4, 5) Applicant also is alleged 
                                            
3 At the time this SOR was issued, the former September 1, 2006 AGs were in effect that listed 
AG ¶ 10(7) “voting in a foreign election” as a specific disqualifying condition. Under the new AGs effective 
June 8, 2017, no such specific provision exists. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to have had contact with members of the Iraqi Parliament. He clarified that stating that 
he did have contact with a member of the Iraqi Parliament during that member’s visit to 
the United States, however, his contact with this member is infrequent and primarily 
limited to times during this member’s infrequent visits to the United States, the last visit 
being in 2015. (Items 2, 5)  
 
Lastly, it was alleged that Applicant’s mother-in-law was a citizen and resident of 
Syria. Applicant also clarified his mother-in-law’s status stating that she holds 
permanent residence alien status (green card) and lives in the United States near his 
residence. She was a career homemaker and has no affiliation with the Syrian 
government. In about the 2015 timeframe, she visited Syria for about a year to care for 
a sick relative, and has since returned to the United States. As of December 2016, she 
had a pending application to become a United States citizen. (Items 2, 4, 5) 
 
 From October 2006 to December 2006, Applicant was employed by a defense 
contractor as a linguist in Iraq and held a clearance. He was required to leave that 
position prematurely to settle his divorce with his first wife. (Item 4) Applicant’s mother, 
two brothers, and one sister are naturalized U.S. citizens and reside near him. He has a 
brother and a sister who are resident citizens of Australia. His late father was also a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. (Item 4) Applicant’s wife, stepson, and two stepdaughters are 
naturalized U.S. citizens and reside with or near him. He has daily contact with his U.S.-
based relatives, infrequent contact with his Australian-based relatives, and infrequent 
contact with his Syrian-based sister-in-law. (Items 3, 4, 5) 
 
 All of Applicant’s real and personal property and assets are located in the United 
States. He has no assets outside of the United States. He is a law-abiding citizen and 
has never been arrested. (Items 4, 5) Applicant left Iraq because of religious 
persecution. He is very grateful for the opportunities available to him in the United 
States. (Item 2) 
 
Iraq 
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at high risk for 
kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The U.S. 
Government considers the potential threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq to be 
serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is extremely limited given the security environment. The Islamic State 
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of Iraq’s territory. Within areas 
under ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to exercise control and 
ensure public safety.  
 
Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies 
throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur 
frequently in many areas of the country, including Baghdad. Methods of attack have 
included explosively formed penetrators (EFPs), magnetic IEDs placed on vehicles, 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines placed on or concealed near roads, mortars and 
rockets, and shootings using various direct fire weapons. Such attacks often take place 
in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Iraq witnessed a continued surge of terrorist activity in 2015, primarily as a result 
of the actions of ISIL. In 2015, the ISIL remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, 
maintaining a formidable force in Iraq and Syria, including a large number of foreign 
terrorist fighters. ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq reached a high point in 
spring 2015, but began to erode over the second half of 2015. Although the government 
of Iraq made significant progress in its campaign to retake occupied territory from ISIL, 
there remained a security vacuum in parts of Iraq.  
 
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that ISIL 
committed the overwhelming number of serious human rights abuses, including attacks 
against civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL, members of other 
religious and ethnic minorities, women, and children. ISIL members committed acts of 
violence on a mass scale, including killing by suicide bombings, improvised explosive 
devices, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and other forms of executions. 
Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of 
government and society weakened the Iraqi government's authority and worsened 
effective human rights protections. 
 
Syria 
 
 The Syrian Arab Republic (Syria) is ruled by an authoritarian regime dominated 
by the Socialist Ba’ath Party, which is currently engaged in a full-scale civil war with the 
armed Syrian opposition.  The Syrian regime has used deadly force to quell anti-
government protests and is engaged in a full-scale civil war with armed groups.  The 
Syrian government is no longer in control of vast swathes of the country, particularly in 
northern, southern, and eastern Syria and Damascus suburbs.  The Islamic State in Iraq 
and Syria  (ISIS) controls large amounts of territory in the east of the country where it 
has committed atrocities against civilians, including the murder of U.S. citizens.  The 
Syrian regime’s military operations have involved the use of ballistic missiles, aerial 
attacks, heavy artillery, and chemical weapons targeting civilian centers.” 
  
 Attacks from the regime or other groups could happen with little or no warning 
and no part of Syria should be considered immune from violence.  The potential for 
violence exists throughout the country for unpredictable and hostile acts, including 
kidnappings, sniper assaults, terrorist attacks, large- and small-scale bombings, as well 
as arbitrary arrest, detention, and torture.  There is an ongoing and increased risk of 
kidnapping of U.S. citizens and Westerners throughout the country.  U.S. citizens 
remain a specific target. 
     
 The security situation throughout the country is very likely to remain volatile and 
unpredictable for the foreseeable future, with some areas experiencing substantially 
increased levels of violence.  The conflict has caused over 400,000 deaths with many 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
thousands more wounded, 5.1 million refugees, and 6.3 million displaced persons inside 
Syria, while 4.53 million remain in hard-to-reach and besieged areas. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State continues to warn citizens against travel to Syria 
and strongly recommends that U.S. citizens remaining in Syria depart immediately.” 
Syria is designated by the U.S. Department of State as a State Sponsor of Terrorism, 
and has been since 1979.  The Assad regime continues to provide political and military 
support to a variety of terrorist groups affecting the stability of the region.  It has 
provided political and weapons support to Hizballah and Iran.  Iran, in turn, has 
supported the Syrian regime against its opposition. 
 
 The Assad regime has played a significant role in the growth of terrorist 
organizations such as al Qaida and ISIS.  Because of its permissive attitude towards 
these organizations and others like them, it has acted as a terrorist hub for foreign 
fighters entering Iraq to battle U.S.-led coalition forces.  Over the years, Syria’s 
encouragement of violent extremists to transit through its borders has resulted in it 
becoming an environment where terrorist groups such as ISIS have planned and 
launched deadly terrorist attacks against external countries such as France, Saudi 
Arabia, Lebanon, and the United States. 
   
 The U.S. Department of State’s 2016 Human Rights Report stated that the worst 
human rights violations were caused by the Assad regime’s fundamental lack of regard 
for the well-being of most of its populace.  Human Rights violations were widespread 
and consisted of the government’s failure to protect its people from deadly violence and 
other abuses by terrorist groups such as ISIS and Jabhat al-Nusra.  The Assad 
government has perpetrated indiscriminate and unlawful violence against its citizens, 
including bombings of schools, hospitals, and residential areas . . . often for the purpose 
of furthering a military goal.  The Assad regime also violated its citizens’ basic civil 
liberties, such as the right to a fair trial, and freedoms of movement, expression, and 
association. 
   
 The Syrian government conducts surveillance of foreign visitors.  U.S. citizens 
visiting Syria should expect the potential for monitoring of their activities, and the 
possibility of incarceration for seemingly innocuous actions such as taking pictures, 
using a GPS, or discussing politics or religion. 
  
 In December 2015, President Obama signed into law the “Visa Waiver Program 
and Terrorist Travel Protection Act of 2015.  As implemented, the Act restricted citizens 
of (and foreign visitors to) Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, and Yemen from the 
benefits of an existing Visa Waiver Program in what it called an effort to address “the 
growing threat from foreign terrorist fighters.”  The seven countries were excluded from 
the Visa Waiver Program because they were determined to have repeatedly provided 
support for acts of international terrorism, and /or because the Secretary of Homeland 
Security deemed that visitation to or habitation in the specified countries by a foreign 
national increased the likelihood that the foreign national will represent a credible threat 
to the national security of the United States. 
  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 On January 27, 2017, President Trump signed Executive Order No. 13769. 
“Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry in to the United States,” 82 Fed. 
Reg. 8977 (EO-1).  In its review of EO-1, the U.S. Supreme Court observed: “Among 
other directives, the order suspended entry of foreign nationals from seven countries 
identified as presenting heightened terrorism risks - - Syria, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, 
Sudan, and Yemen - - for 90 days . . . .  EO-1 was immediately challenged in court . . . .  
Rather than continue to litigate EO-1, the Government announced that it would revoke 
the order and issue a new one. . . .” 
 
 On March 6, 2017, President Trump signed Executive Order No. 13780, 82 Fed. 
Reg. 13209 (EO-2), which reduced the affected countries to six, including Syria.  
Several injunctions on the implementation of EO-2 were ordered by Federal courts 
around the country and the cases were consolidated for hearing at the U.S. Supreme 
Court.  On June 26, 2017, the Supreme Court stayed the injunctions in part, which 
allows the restrictions in EO-2 on U.S. entry to be enforced against citizens from Syria, 
Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, and Yemen unless they “have a credible claim of a bona 
fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States.”  (The Bona Fide 
Relationship Exception).  According to the text of EO-2, this “pause is necessary to 
ensure that dangerous individuals do not enter the United States while the Executive is 
working to establish ‘adequate standards . . . to prevent infiltration by foreign terrorists.’” 
 
 On September 24, 2017, President Trump issued a Presidential Proclamation 
titled “Enhancing Vetting Capabilities and Processes for Detecting Attempted Entry into 
the United States by Terrorists or other Public-Safety Threats” (the Proclamation).  
Under this action, nationals of eight countries, including Syria, are subject to various 
travel restrictions.  With respect to Syrian nationals, the Government will no longer issue 
“nonimmigrant visas” after October 18, 2017, under the Bona Fide Relationship 
Exception, but State Department Consular officers may determine if a given visa 
applicant is exempt from the restrictions of the Proclamation or is eligible for a waiver 
thereunder. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.  By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment.  The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right 
or privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 10 sets out one condition with one subsection that could potentially raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including, but not limited to: 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign 
person, group, organization or government in any way that 
conflicts with U.S. national security interests. 
 
AG ¶ 11 lists one condition that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns: 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern.  
 
 Applicant’s November 28, 2016 SOR alleged that Applicant voted in 2005 and 
2008 Iraqi elections in a remote U.S. location near his U.S. home while a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. Applicant’s explanation for voting at that time is reasonable. When he 
voted, he did not have a security clearance nor is there any record evidence that he 
contemplated applying for a security clearance. He also wanted to support a candidate 
sympathetic to the United States and supportive of his belief system. Voting in a foreign 
election raised a disqualifying condition under the previous foreign preference AGs. 
However, under the 2017 AGs, voting in a foreign election no longer raised a specific 
foreign preference concern. In the unlikely event a concern exits under the new AGs, 
relief is available under AG ¶ 11 and under the whole-person analysis, discussed below.  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant does not have frequent contacts4 with an Iraqi member of Parliament, 
but does have contact with his Syrian sister-in-law by telephone about three times a 
year. His contact with an Iraqi member of Parliament is situational and is primarily 
limited to those times during this member’s infrequent visits to the United States. His 
frequent contact with immediate family members is centered on those U.S.-based 
relatives. AG ¶ 7(a) is not established with regard to the Iraqi member of Parliament, but 
is established with regard to his Syrian sister-in-law. AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e) apply. SOR ¶¶ 
2.a. and 2.b are not established as security concerns precluding the necessity of further 
discussion. 
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq and Syria 
because of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers 
on behalf of the DOD in Iraq briefly in 2006 and he is willing to do so in the future. 
During the timeframe that Applicant’s SOR was issued, his Syrian-born and naturalized 
U.S. citizen wife, was working as a linguist for a defense contractor in Iraq. Numerous 
linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Iraq and Syria. Thousands of the 
U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Iraq and Syria are 
targets of terrorists along with Iraqi and Syrian civilians who support the Iraq 
Government and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more constitutes “frequent 
contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every 
four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Iraq or Syria is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse’s mother is Syrian-
born, but now lives in the United States with a pending application to become a U.S. 
citizen. Applicant’s sister-in-law, however, lives in Syria with whom he has telephonic 
contact about three times a year and has provided her with modest financial support in 
the past. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in Syria could result in a security concern. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of close 
family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its human 
rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign 
family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq and Syria with the United 
States, and the situation in Iraq and Syria place a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family 
members living in Syria do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into 
a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
a desire to assist a relative living in Syria.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Syria 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and has an enormous problem with terrorism. 
Applicant’s relationships with relatives who may be living in Syria create a potential 
conflict of interest because terrorists could place pressure on his family living in Iraq or 
Syria in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. These 
relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with a person and group in Iraq and family in Syria and has raised 
the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e) 
apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance. 
See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 
905 (1991). After the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 
2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply. Applicant does not have frequent contact with 
an Iraqi member of Parliament and his connection with and support for the Assyrian 
Democratic Movement poses limited security significance. However, that is not the case 
with regard to his Syrian sister-in-law. She is a resident citizen of Syria. A key factor in 
the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S.” In 1976, Applicant immigrated to the United States as a religious refugee, 
and in 1982, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse lives in the United States, and she 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. Applicant’s mother, two brothers, one sister, 
stepson, and two stepdaughters are naturalized U.S. citizens and residents and live 
hear him.   
 
Applicant’s support to the DOD and the support of his wife in Iraq as a linguist 
and cultural advisor, including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards 
mitigating security concerns. Applicant has served as a linguist in Iraq, and when this 
SOR was issued, his wife was as a serving as a linguist in Iraq, providing critical 
assistance to U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. He has offered 
to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Iraq. He has shown his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States during his service in Iraq and desire 
to serve again in the future. Additionally, his wife has shown that same patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens of 
Syria and could possibly be located in Syria. Applicant’s sister-in-law lives in Syria. Like 
every other resident of Syria, any of his relatives who may be living in Syria are at risk 
from terrorists. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of 
manpower and money in Iraq, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Iraq. Applicant and his relatives possibly living in Syria are potential targets of terrorists, 
and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk if 
his relatives are still living in Syria.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s possible future connections to his relatives living in Syria are 
less significant than his connections to the United States. Applicant and his wife’s 
employment in support of the U.S. Government, numerous family members living in the 
United States, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and lengthy U.S. 
citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines C and B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant and presumably his spouse have contact with her sister in Syria. 
Contact with an Iraqi member of Parliament is deemed infrequent and not a factor in this 
analysis. Any relationships with citizens and residents of Syria raise important foreign 
influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the 
United States.      
 
In 1976, Applicant immigrated to the United States to escape religious 
persecution in Iraq, and in 1982, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse lives in the 
United States, and she became a U.S. citizen in 2007. Applicant briefly served as a 
DOD contractor linguist in 2006 and when this SOR was issued in 2016, his wife was 
serving as a DOD contractor linguist in Iraq. The majority of his immediate family to 
include his spouse, brothers, sister, and three stepchildren are all U.S. citizens and live 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
near him. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the United 
States. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused 
alcohol or illegal drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. All of Applicant’s assets 
are located in the United States as opposed to having no assets outside of the United 
States.  
 
All these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, 
resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to 
coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His 
past honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of his security 
clearance. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant 
of security clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a translator and as a 
cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and 
facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put his life in danger on 
at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign preference and 
foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
