 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03111 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 11, 2016. 
On November 29, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2016, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations. He stated that the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.f, had been paid, and he would provide confirmation. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
September 6, 2017. On March 22, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for April 12, 2018. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) were not available for the hearing.2 I left the 
record open until May 25, 2018, for Department Counsel to provide the GEs to 
Applicant. He did not object and GE 1 through 5 were later admitted into evidence 
without objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through K, including four character reference letters, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant also submitted additional documents post-hearing including: 
federal tax returns for tax years (TY) 2011 – 2016; state A tax returns for TY 2011 – 
2014; and state B tax returns for TY 2014 – 2016; an IRS tax transcript for TY 2013; 
another character reference letter, and pay stubs from July 2015 to December 2016 
reflecting garnishments every two weeks to pay the debt at SOR ¶ 1.c. (AE L) All were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He graduated from high school in 1985. Applicant has 
two adult stepdaughters, ages 31 and 37. He also lost a stepdaughter who died in 2009 
at age 24. Applicant has been married for 22 years and his wife was with him at the 
hearing. He was previously married in 1987 and divorced 13 months later; and married 
in 1994 and divorced one month later. Applicant has been employed as a mechanical 
technician for a federal contractor since April 2013. He had a security clearance 
previously in 2002.  
 
In § 26 of his January 2016 SCA, he disclosed that he was contemplating filing 
for bankruptcy protection because he fell behind when his wife lost her job and they 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 Department Counsel’s briefcase was sidetracked en route to the hearing. I left the record open for him to 
submit the GEs, which had already been provided in discovery, to Applicant. I also allowed time for 
Applicant to object. He did not raise an objection.  
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s January 11, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
 
3 
 
 
moved to another state He also disclosed his failure to file federal and state tax returns 
for TY 2012–2014, and several other delinquent debts. He claimed these delinquencies 
were due to unexplained financial hardship. (GE 1)  
 
The SOR alleges failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns for TY 
2012–2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$35,000 for credit-card debts, judgments, and delinquent medical debts plus a home 
foreclosure in November 2015 (SOR ¶1.k). Applicant admitted to all of these delinquent 
debts in his Answer to the SOR. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has now filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection as of December 2017. (Tr. 30) The plan requires 
that payments of $709 be deducted from his paycheck each two weeks and paid to the 
bankruptcy trustee. He has been making the payments since December 2017. (AE E, 
Tr. 20)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant provided tax returns for State A for TYs 2016, 2015, 
and 2014 (AE F, G, and H), which reflected that they were filed or submitted in April 
2016. He also provided a tax return for state B for TY 2011 and a federal (IRS form 
1040) tax return for FY 2011 (AE I, K). Additionally, he provided an IRS tax transcript for 
TY 2013 (AE J). All were filed in April 2016. Applicant ascribed the reason for his failure 
to file these returns timely as stupidity and grieving the loss of his 24-year-old 
stepdaughter in 2009. (Tr. 28) He provided no evidence that he requested extensions 
from the IRS or state taxing authorities to file late. Post-hearing submissions indicate 
that he subsequently filed several TYs of state and federal tax returns for 2011-2016 in 
April 2016. (AE L)  
 
Applicant testified that his job moved from state B to state A in late 2013. When 
they moved, his wife lost her job and was out of the workforce for two years. (Tr. 25, 39) 
Since they were constrained to one income, they had difficulties keeping up with debts. 
They used credit cards to pay for daily living expenses. (Tr. 39) SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h and 1.i 
are all charged-off credit card debts that have now been included in his bankruptcy 
repayment plan. (Tr. 39) SOR 1.b is a judgment entered against Applicant for $5,559 as 
a result of credit-card debt. It has now been included in his bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 29) 
SOR ¶ 1.c is another judgment in the amount of $20,830. Applicant testified that it has 
been paid and provided evidence in post-hearing documents showing that his pay is 
being garnished every two weeks, to pay this judgment. The record was kept open for 
two weeks until April 26, 2018. (Tr. 29) SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are for delinquent-
tuition payments for a gunsmithing course, and a medical debt, that have now been 
included in Applicant’s bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 36-37) Applicant did not know how much 
the deficiency was when his home in state B was foreclosed upon in 2015. (Tr. 49) He 
had no explanation why he couldn’t pay his debts on a salary consistently in the range 
of $100,000 per year in State A. (Tr. 48-49)  
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his job. Applicant’s earns $2,860 every 
two weeks. His wife now works in the same demilitarization facility and she earns 
$1,100 every two weeks. (Tr. 40) Applicant has approximately $10,000 in his 401k 
retirement account. (Tr. 44) His tax returns indicate that Applicant had gross income of 
 
4 
 
 
$155,000 in 2011, and $160,000 in 2012. (AE I and J) In 2014, it was $128,000. (AE H) 
Applicant testified that he had taken online credit counseling as a precondition to filing 
for bankruptcy, and they had formulated a budget. He promised to produce their budget, 
but did not deliver. (Tr. 42) He provided no other evidence of financial counseling or 
debt consolidation services. He did provide four very favorable character reference 
letters (AE A – D) that all attest to his work ethic, character and trustworthiness. 
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
  (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local  
            income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local 
            income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file income tax returns and his delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit reports, tax returns, and answer to the 
 
6 
 
 
SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19 (e) thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.4 
Applicant has not met that burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant lost his 24-year-old daughter in 2009. However, he filed his tax returns 
for that year and TY 2010. People grieve differently and it is impossible to know when 
and what impact grief will have on a particular individual. It is nonetheless unclear how 
this tragedy precluded Applicant from filing timely federal and state tax returns in 2012, 
2013, and 2014. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to develop this 
possible mitigation. He filed the majority of his delinquent tax returns in April 2016. It 
was too little, too late. AG ¶ 20 (g) only has partial application.  
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant had to move to follow his job in 2013, and this caused the loss of his 
wife’s income. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his control. However, he 
has not produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant only recently filed for bankruptcy 
protection at the end of 2017. To his credit, he entered into a chapter 13 repayment 
plan, and he has made several months of payment to the trustee. However, these 
delinquencies go back almost a decade and it is inexplicable how he was unable to 
make payments in the first place. He was consistently earning $100,000 or more in 
salary in a low-cost-of living area. Applicant has not met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He produced no 
substantiating documents to show that the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c was in fact paid off, 
and he submitted no budget. The delinquent debts have not been resolved. The 
mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his financial problems are under control. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
 
8 
 
 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
