 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-01337 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on February 6, 2017, and requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
On March 2, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by her on March 21, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response 
to the FORM or object to the Government’s Items. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and single. She attended college, but did not complete a 
degree. Since December 2014, she has worked for a defense contractor. Prior to this 
position, she worked in private industry from October 2013 to November 2014. She 
worked for another federal contractor from March 2012 to March 2013. She served on 
active duty from April 2004 to May 2009, when she was honorably discharged as an E-5 
for a medical condition. (Item 3) She was unemployed from March 2013 to October 2013, 
and from May 2009 to March 2012. (Item 3) 
 
 On March 16, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
In it, she disclosed one $1,500 delinquent debt, but failed to disclose a 2013 automobile 
repossession, judgments filed in 2009, 2010, and 2012, and a 2013 delinquent student 
loan. During a June 26, 2015 interview with a government investigator, Applicant stated 
that she reviewed her credit report in December 2014, which was the reason she 
disclosed the one delinquent debt. She said she never received notice of the judgments. 
She said she did not recall having an account with the collection agency representing the 
student loan. She attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment. (Item 1, 
Item 4) 
 
 In her Answer to the two SOR personal conduct allegations, which claimed that 
she deliberately failed to disclose requested financial delinquencies, Applicant wrote 
“admit” after each allegation. She did not offer any additional explanations. (Item 2) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from March 2016 and March 2015, the SOR 
alleged 17 debts that became delinquent between 2010 and 2015, and totaled over 
$23,000. They included student loans, credit cards, medical debts, an automobile 
repossession, and a garnishment for a defaulted student loan. (Item 5, Item 6)  
 
 In her February 2017 Answer, Applicant submitted proof that she paid the two 
delinquent student loans, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. (Item 2) She did not provide  
evidence that she resolved any of the other debts. There is no evidence that Applicant 
participated in financial or credit counseling. (Item 4) She did not provide a budget or 
 
 
3 
 
 
other information related to her financial obligations from which to determine her current 
financial reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2010 and continued into 2015. The evidence raises security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose between 2010 and 2015, and all but two of 
them continue to be unresolved. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. Applicant attributed her 
financial problems to two periods of unemployment, which may have been circumstances 
beyond her control. She did not provide evidence that she has attempted to responsibly 
manage her financial obligations; thus, AG ¶ 20(b) provides limited mitigation. There is 
no evidence that she participated in credit or financial counseling, or that her delinquent 
debts are being resolved and under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. She provided 
evidence that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. are paid. She established 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for those debts.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One may be potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant formally admitted, in her Answer, the two personal conduct allegations 
that asserted she deliberately failed to disclose requested financial information. She 
provided no amplifying information for her admission that would explain or justify this 
conduct. The evidence established the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Five are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
The record does not contain evidence to establish any of the above mitigating 
conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual who honorably served in the military for five years. 
She subsequently worked as a civilian for a defense contractor. In the FORM, she was 
informed that the evidence she submitted in response to the SOR was insufficient to 
mitigate the financial and personal conduct allegations. Despite that notice, she did not 
provide additional evidence that she was resolving the delinquent debts or submit an 
explanation addressing the allegations that she withheld information from the 
Government. The absence of mitigating evidence on these allegations compels a finding 
that she failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:       For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.q:       Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          AGAINST APPLICANT  
  
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:       Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
