 
 
 
 
1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-02488 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                    For Applicant: Pro so 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In an undated 
response, Applicant addressed the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was 
assigned the case on May 10, 2017. The matter was scheduled on May 10, 2017, for a 
June 14, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered eight documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-8. Applicant gave testimony and 
offered nine documents, accepted without objection as Exs. A-I. The record was left 
open through July 17, 2017, to provide the parties with sufficient time to submit 
additional materials. In the interim, a transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG have been 
amended. The recently amended AG are in effect for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
June 22, 2017. On July 18, 2017, Applicant submitted additional documents, which 
were accepted without objection as Exs. J-Q. On August 1, 2017, documents noted as 
Exs. R-U were also accepted without objection, and the record was closed. After review 
of the record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated finance-related security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old analyst who has worked for the same defense 
contractor since 2013. She presently earns about $73,000 a year. She earned a high 
school diploma in 1984. Applicant is married and has three children, ranging in age from 
15 to 21. She received financial counseling in 2012. 
 
 At issue in this case are concerns related to Applicant’s financial fitness based on 
13 allegations, which address delinquent debts, a dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition, a tax lien, delinquent taxes, and failure to file income taxes for tax year (TY) 
2010. She attributed her financial woes to managing her late father’s estate since 2013, 
her daughter’s unexpectedly high college costs, and two periods of unemployment.  
 
 In 2001, Applicant began work as a public transportation conductor. In May 2007, 
however, her vehicle was struck by a tractor-trailer on her way home from work. Her 
injuries were severe and prohibited her from returning to work. After 14 months of 
unemployment, she returned to the workplace in July 2008, albeit at a notably reduced 
salary from what she had earned previously.  
 
From 2008 to 2011, Applicant was steadily employed. In July 2011, she was 
subject to a layoff. Applicant remained unemployed until May 2013. During these two 
years, she was supported by her husband, a bus driver earning about $80,000. Without 
her full-time income, the family’s financial situation suffered, although she maintained a 
part-time position she began in 2004 and at which she continued through 2013. (Tr. 18-
19) That part-time job, as a process server, varied in income from zero to a couple of 
hundred dollars a week. Both during her 2007-2008 and 2011-2013 periods of 
unemployment, during which time the family relied on Applicant’s husband’s income, the 
couple was “going back and forth . . . trying to rob Peter to pay Paul.” (Tr. 21)  
 
In the interim, in October 2012, Hurricane Sandy damaged her dying father’s 
house. (Tr. 69) Applicant’s father passed away the following month. Applicant was 
named coexecutrix of the estate. She and her sister tried to restore the home to its pre-
hurricane condition and make small improvements on the property in order to put the 
house on the market. Meanwhile, they had been making contributions toward their late 
father’s mortgage to keep it current. Applicant has been paying about $600 a month 
toward that effort. She hopes to use some of her share of the sale to recoup the money 
she was paying on her late father’s home and address any remaining debts that she 
might have.2 (Tr. 71) The sale was completed on August 25, 2017. (Ex. R) 
                                                          
2 Applicant, along with her sister, the other co-executrix, has been contributing $175 to $300 a month 
toward maintaining her late father’s mortgage. (Tr. 71-72) After sale of the property, the proceeds will be 
split between four siblings. 
 
 
 
 
3 
The sisters found an interested buyer for the house early on, and a deposit was 
collected. (Tr. 69-70; Exs. F-G) Unexpectedly, however, the potential purchaser died, 
quashing the sale. (Tr. 70) At the time of the hearing, another buyer had been found, 
and the property was poised to go to settlement within a few days after the hearing. (Tr. 
70) That action will complete and relieve Applicant of her co-executrix duties. 
 
At issue in the SOR are the following allegations: 
 
1.a – Past-due mortgage ($91,751 on total balance of $412,572) – In repayment. 
Applicant had a monthly obligation of about $2,300-$2,400 a month for mortgage 
payments. She fell behind on her mortgage during her last period of unemployment, in 
early 2012. The mortgagor would not work with her, despite her explanations as to her 
present circumstances. It was around this time she was advised to file for bankruptcy in 
order to avoid foreclosure. (Tr. 24; see allegation 1.d, below) Although her husband was 
against the idea, she pursued the bankruptcy process solely for that reason. (Tr. 24) 
She did not want to see her children homeless. (Tr. 24) After the hearing, it was 
discovered she was behind by two payments, a situation she worked through with the 
lender. (Ex. L) One of the two past-due payments has been completed, with another 
anticipated in 30 days. (Ex. T) 
 
For two years, Applicant made payments on the bankruptcy, ultimately 
abandoning the bankruptcy payment schedule once a reasonable home loan 
modification was arranged in 2016, allowing her to honor her mortgage debt directly and 
in full. In the process, the total balance of the loan was reduced from $412,572 by 
$223,537. (Ex. M) This was accomplished by the issuance of an Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) for that sum. (Ex. A; Tr. 29) She and her 
husband now make monthly payments of about $2,100 toward the new home loan 
balance. (Exs. K, M, and S) 
 
1.b – Collection account ($1,356) – In dispute. This debt is related to the rental of 
a trumpet. (Tr. 39) Applicant claims the store damaged the instrument while cleaning it. 
Due to the damage, Applicant ceased making payments on the trumpet. Applicant has 
disputed this account. (Ex. N) She is willing to honor the debt if the amount is correctly 
owed. (Tr. 41-42)  
 
1.c – Collection account ($608) – Paid. In January 0217, Applicant arranged to 
make three payments to satisfy this debt. (Tr. 42) Evidence of satisfaction was provided. 
(Tr. 42-43; Ex. B) 
 
1.d – Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing from January 2012 – Voluntarily abandoned. 
This petition was dismissed in January 2015 for failure to make payments. As noted 
above, this action was taken by Applicant solely to avoid foreclosure on Applicant’s 
family’s home. She insisted the petition be a Chapter 13 bankruptcy so she could still 
make payments honoring her debts, rather than filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She 
made monthly payments of up to $1,700 for about two years while seeking a loan 
 
 
 
 
4 
modification on her mortgage. (Tr. 25) Once a home loan modification was arranged, 
she abandoned the Chapter 13 bankruptcy to address her debts directly. (Tr. 26) 
 
1.e and 1.f – Collection accounts ($1,519 and $1,519, respectively) – In dispute. 
These debts are related to gym memberships. After signing the membership 
agreements, the gym determined Applicant’s husband was not sufficiently fit to work out 
at the club. (Tr. 43) Applicant and her husband thought his denial was for a trial 
membership. Since he could not use the gym, Applicant did not go to the gym. Later, it 
was discovered they had signed full membership agreements, even though the gym 
would not honor her husband’s application or membership. Applicant requested the gym 
to cancel the memberships since her husband could not work out with her. The issue 
has since been put in dispute with a leading credit reporting bureau. (Ex. P)  
 
1.g – Telecommunications collection ($505) – Developing repayment plan. In her 
SOR Answer, Applicant noted that she had planned to pay this balance by March 2017. 
She failed to make the payment when she became absorbed with addressing her late 
father’s estate issues. (Tr. 47) Applicant is still planning to honor this debt. (Tr. 47, 78) 
She is working with the telecommunication entity on a payment plan. (Ex. U) 
 
 1.h and 1.i – Medical collection accounts ($206 and $45, respectively). In 
dispute/Paid. The first account is of unidentified origin, while the second account is a 
collection agent. After research, Applicant stated she now knows the basis for the 
charge at 1.i and that that it was satisfied “years ago”; she is still unclear as to the basis 
for the charge at 1.h. (Tr. 47-48). She showed that she disputed the account at 1.h with 
a leading credit reporting bureau. (Ex. O)  
 
1.j – Applicant has gambled since she was a young adult. Throughout her life, 
Applicant has dabbled in some form of wagering. Sometimes, it involved making small 
bets on games of Yahtzee with her children, other times it involved playing slot 
machines when she and her husband or friends went to a nearby casino for dinner or 
entertainment. (Tr. 34-35) She resides in an area with multiple gaming and slots casinos 
nearby which offer other forms of entertainment. If she gambles outside the home, she 
limits both her losses and her gains to $50-$100 a visit. She does not visit such places 
on a regular basis. It is recreational wagering and not an addiction.3 It has not 
significantly contributed to her delinquent debts to the extent such activities represent 
her entertainment expenses, as opposed to spending money on other form of 
entertainment (ie. movies, books, etc.) She has never concealed her gambling or 
borrowed money to make wagers.  
 
 1.k – Federal tax lien entered in February 2012 ($7,491). Satisfied. During the 
bankruptcy process, this balance was split and the halves made attributable to both 
Applicant and her husband, respectively. (Tr. 50) A partial release on the lien balance 
was issued in May 2016, while a full release was issued in March 2017. (Tr. 49-51; Exs. 
                                                          
3 Gambling debts were accidently included on Applicant’s bankruptcy petition by her lawyer. (Tr. 81-82) 
They do not reflect genuine gambling debts. (Tr. 32-33) 
 
 
 
 
5 
C-D) It was satisfied through payments and refunds, in both the case of Applicant’s 
share and that owed by her husband. (Tr. 52-57, 59; Exs. K and S)  
 
 1.l – Failure to timely file state and federal income tax returns for TY 2010. – 
Filed late. Applicant filed the tax returns for TY 2010 in December 2011, rather than in 
the spring of that year. (Tr. 62) Applicant no longer remembers the reason why she was 
almost eight months late with her filings. (Tr. 62-63) Applicant posits it was an anomaly 
and simply the result of oversight or an accident. (Tr. 64 Ex. T) She may have been 
distracted by her father’s declining health. She had never before filed taxes, state or 
federal, late. (Tr. 64)  
 
 1.m – Balance owed ($1,000) to state taxing authority. Developing repayment 
plan. Having been previously unaware of this owed balance, Applicant had not 
incorporated the sum into her balance sheets. She has adjusted her withholdings to 
have repayment on the debt come from tax refunds. (Tr. 68) In the meanwhile, she is 
waiting for the proceeds from the imminent sale of her late father’s home to pay off any 
additional balances owed. (Tr. 68; Exs. F-G) As a good faith gesture, she has made an 
initial payment of $50 on this debt. (Ex.U) 
 
 Much of Applicant’s remaining financial distress is related to her late father’s 
house and her dealing with other duties related to his estate. Those financial 
distractions will soon pass. While Applicant is currently living paycheck-to-paycheck 
because of those burdens, she stays within her income as she honors her monthly 
obligations, including payments on the debt noted at SOR allegation 1.a. (Tr. 72) With 
the sale of her late father’s home near completion, Applicant will soon have at least a 
net monthly surplus of $600, the sum saved from paying her father’s mortgage. 
Moreover, her daughter just graduated from college, liberating Applicant from the high 
costs of educating that child. (Tr. 72) While her son plans on attending college, 
Applicant and her husband will only be paying for part of his expenses and he will use 
student loans to finances the balance. In addition, Applicant has readjusted her IRS 
withholdings to assure future tax years will yield refunds, not sums due.  
 
Applicant and her husband maintain retirement accounts. Applicant’s retirement 
account has a balance of about $30,000. (Tr. 74) Applicant has not had any major 
purchases in recent years, except for an automobile purchased for Applicant’s son for 
only $600-$800. (Tr. 74-75) Applicant’s own car is a Nissan Sentra purchased used. 
Applicant’s only vacation was to another state several years ago to see childhood 
friends. Otherwise, the family has been “streamlining” their costs and expenses while 
maintaining their budget. (Tr. 76)  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
6 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting adequate evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted facts or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant had 
acquired multiple delinquent debts, filed for a subsequently dismissed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy action, had a federal tax lien entered against her, failed to timely file a state 
and a federal tax return for TY 2010, owed $1,000 to her state taxing authority, and 
gambled. This is sufficient to consider financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(h): borrowing money or engaging in significant financial 
transactions to fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and  
 
 AG ¶ 19(f): concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems 
caused by gambling.  
 
Under these facts, the following conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-
related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.     
  
           Applicant attributed her financial woes to managing her late father’s estate and 
making payments on his mortgage since 2012, unexpectedly high college costs related 
to her daughter’s education, and two highly two notable periods of unemployment. 
 
 
 
 
8 
During the approximately five years at issue, Applicant maintained a part-time job, 
pursued financial counseling, economized, and tried to live within budget. Given these 
facts, AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
  
With regards to her debts, Applicant has made notable strides. A past-due 
balance on her mortgage of approximately $91,000 has been significantly reduced to 
about $2,300 or $2,400 by leveraging her lender to permit a loan modification and by 
catching up on payments. She has earnestly disputed the accounts at SOR allegations 
1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h. She has satisfied the obligations at 1.c, 1.i, and 1.k., and is 
working on devising repayments plans for the delinquent accounts noted at 1.g and 1.m.    
She voluntarily abandoned the Chapter 13 bankruptcy action, noted at 1.d, in order to 
personally and directly honor her debts, including her mortgage.  
 
Applicant explained that her gambling was purely a social activity, limited to 
games at home with her children or to minor wins or losses on her nights on the town. 
(1.j). Finally, she provided evidence that her TY 2010 taxes, which were filed 
approximately 10 months late through accident or oversight, have been filed (1.l) Only 
the $1,000 owed to her state taxing authority, noted at SOR allegation 1.m, lacks 
evidence of progress, although she wrote after the hearing she has made a first 
payment of $50 to that entity. Given the effort thus far demonstrated, and the increase 
in income soon to be realized with the sale of her father’s home and her daughter’s 
graduation from school, Applicant now has the ability and the commitment to honor her 
significantly reduced debt balance. The financial counseling she received should help 
her continue to live within her present budget. I find AG ¶ 20(c), AG ¶ 20(d), and AG ¶ 
20(e) apply. Due to a lack of documentary evidence regarding her $50 payment to her 
state taxing authority, however, AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old analyst earning about $73,000 a year. She has worked 
for the same defense contractor since 2013. A high school graduate, she is married and 
has three children, ranging from 15 to 21.  
 
Applicant received financial counseling in 2012, around the time she filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection as a ploy to protect her home from foreclosure. She 
progressed on her bankruptcy payments until the end of 2014, when she finally 
convinced her mortgagor to approve a home loan modification. This measure helped 
her avoid foreclosure and get her back on surer footing with regard to her mortgage. 
 
 
 
 
9 
Presently, she has a past-due balance of under $3,000, a situation she was poised to 
address within 30 days after her last submissions.  
 
With regard to her other debts, Applicant has either paid them or arranged to 
have them subject to a repayment plan. She has a sound basis for disputing four of the 
debt balances reflected in the SOR. While the federal tax lien has been satisfied, she 
has yet to provide sufficient documentary evidence showing she has started making 
payments on a $1,000 debt owed to her state. She has, however, credibly explained 
that she was 10 months late in filing her TY 2010 state and federal tax returns due to 
distraction or oversight. She also credibly explained that her gambling is a social activity 
with strict limits for wins and losses, and not an unbridled or abused activity that would 
be the cause of significant debt. In addition, she explained that an entry by her attorney 
regarding gambling losses on her bankruptcy petition was an error. 
 
While Applicant has more work to be done to put the entirety of her debts and 
issues to rest, she has made a highly significant start. With the sale of her father’s home 
and the completion of her obligations as his estate’s co-executor, as well as the 
graduation of her daughter, Applicant now has considerably more available income to 
apply to her last remaining debt balances and to save for future contingencies. Given 
her progress to date, and her knowledge that resolution of these matters are a predicate 
to maintaining a security clearance, I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:                                                                                                                                               
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge                                                                                                                                                                             
                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
