 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00425 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
                     For Applicant: Leah M. Peer, Esq.; Dena M. Acosta, Esq. 
 
 
May 17, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines J, G, E, 
and F.1 The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
On December 8, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR, and 
requested the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) 
The case was assigned to this administrative judge on March 7, 2017. The Defense 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 19, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for June 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 12 which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented six 
documents, which were also admitted without objection as Exhibits A through F.  
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He is single, and he has two biological children and two 
stepchildren. He attended two years of college. He served in the United States Navy 
from 1990 to 1996, and he received an Honorable Discharge. Applicant has been 
employed by a defense contractor since 2013 as a Fiber Optics Technician, and he 
seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense 
sector. (Tr at 25-30.) 
  
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR lists seven allegations, (1.a. through 1.g.) regarding Criminal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline J.:  
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in July 1996, and 
charged with Felony Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI). Applicant admitted 
this allegation in his RSOR. At the hearing, he testified that the conviction was reduced 
from a felony to a misdemeanor, and he believed he satisfied all of the requirements 
from this conviction. He attended court ordered Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, 
but he did not get too much from them. He eventually attended another religious 
program. (Tr at 37-41.)  
 
 1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in March 2002, and 
charged with DUI Alcohol/Drugs and Driving While Having a Measurable Blood Alcohol. 
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.  At the hearing, he testified that he did 
not recall the incident, and while it occurred during a time when he was going through a 
contentious divorce, he did not want to blame the incident on anything other than a “bad 
decision.” As a result of the conviction he attended court ordered classes and AA, but 
they did not ultimately improve his conduct. (Tr at 41-44.)  
 
 1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in November 2005, and 
charged with DUI Alcohol/Drugs and Driving While Having a Measurable Blood Alcohol. 
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. He discussed the fact that he was 
 
3 
 
having problems with his father having dementia, which may have contributed to his 
conduct. While he did attend more court mandated classes and AA meetings, they did 
not have an overall positive effect on him. (Tr at 42-50.)   
 
 1.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in August 2010, and 
charged with Drunk in Public. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant 
testified that he did not remember this event. (Tr at 50-51.)   
 
 1.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in April 2011, and 
charged with Trespass and Drunk in Public. Applicant admitted this allegation in his 
RSOR. Applicant testified that this incident involved an issue with him trying to recover 
his belongings from a house, which he had previously shard with the girlfriend.  
Because Applicant had consumed alcohol, a police officer issued him a citation and 
took him to a detention center to prevent him from driving in an intoxicated state.  (Tr at 
74-83.)  
 
 1.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in August 2011, and 
charged with DUI Alcohol/Drugs and Driving While Having a Measurable Blood Alcohol. 
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.  Applicant testified that as a result of this 
arrest and conviction, he attended an 18-month alcohol abuse class and some 
additional classes. He completed this class in July 2014, and he stopped drinking during 
this class. He also began attending a church program during this time, and he became 
more involved with athletics. He believed he was turning his life around during this time. 
(Tr at 52-56.)  
 
 1.g. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in May 2013, and 
charged with Transportation of Controlled Substance, Possession of Controlled 
Substance, Possession of Unlawful Paraphernalia, Under the Influence of Controlled 
Substance, and Driving on a Suspended License. Applicant admitted this allegation in 
his RSOR. Applicant testified that to his knowledge all of the drug charges from this 
incident were dismissed. He claimed only the charge of Driving on a Suspended 
License was found against him, and he had not been aware that his license had been 
suspended. (Tr at 56-58.) Exhibit 3, a report from the FBI, shows that Applicant was 
convicted of Driving a Vehicle with a Suspended License and DUI; Special Violation, for 
which he was ordered to pay a fine and serve 3 years probation.  
 
Applicant also testified that this incident occurred when someone he knew left 
Methamphetamines in Applicant's car, and then left the vehicle to search for someone 
else. According to Applicant, when he was approached by a police officer, Applicant put 
the drugs in his mouth to hide them, and this action made him high. Applicant claimed 
he then took the drugs out of his mouth and then gave them to the officer, and told him 
that the drugs he was hiding in his mouth and making him high were not his. At that 
point the police officer arrested him and took him to the station. (Tr at 116-121.)  
 
 Applicant also testified that all of the probation requirements had been met and 
the fines had been paid, as a result of the allegations in subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g. 
 
4 
 
Applicant also attended a class called Reboot in 2013, which further helped him to get 
his life together. (Tr at 59-60.)    
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR lists one allegation (2.a.) regarding Alcohol Consumption, under 
Adjudicative Guideline G.:  
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct alleged in paragraph 1, 
above, constitutes Alcohol Consumption concerns. Applicant testified that he first 
consumed alcohol around 1987 at the end of his high school years. He was ordered in 
1993, while he was in the Navy, to attend a six month in-house treatment program. 
Applicant conceded that his history of alcohol problems covered a period from his first 
consumption in 1987 to 2013. Despite all of his arrests and convictions, and classes 
and AA meetings advising him to stop drinking alcohol, he could not explain why he did 
not make a decision to abstain from alcohol consumption until 2013. (Tr at 108-112.)   
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR lists one allegation (3.a.) regarding Personal Conduct, under 
Adjudicative Guideline E.: 
 
 3.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct alleged in paragraph 1, 
above, constitutes Personal Conduct concerns. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists three allegations (3.a. through 3.c.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The debts will be discussed 
below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
 4.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,814. In his RSOR Applicant wrote that this debt was paid. At the hearing, 
Applicant claimed that this debt had been paid. (Tr at 65-66.) Exhibit F establishes that 
this debt has been resolved.   
 
 4.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $553. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant claimed 
that this debt had been paid. (Tr at 66-67.) Exhibit F establishes that this debt has been 
resolved.   
  
 4.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $3,249. In his RSOR Applicant wrote that this debt was paid. At the hearing, 
Applicant claimed that this debt had been paid. (Tr at 66-67.) Exhibit F establishes that 
this debt has been resolved.   
 
  
 
5 
 
Mitigation  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents in mitigation, which I have reviewed 
carefully. They include but are not limited to: Proof of completion by Applicant of an 18- 
month Multiple Offender Program (Exhibit A); a certificate of completion of a Reboot 
Workshop program (Exhibit B); a copy of a Guard card and Licensure Registration card 
(Exhibit C); nine letters of recommendation submitted on Applicant’s behalf (Exhibit D); 
and certificates Applicant has earned (Exhibit E).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) (evidence . . .  of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Because of the nature of the criminal offenses discussed above, including seven 
arrests and conviction over a period of many years, the aforementioned disqualifying 
condition has been established.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate a security concern. Applicant’s 
criminal past continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and judgment. I also 
considered Applicant's credibility regarding his testimony about his arrest and conviction 
in 2013. I find his assertion that a friend left drugs in his car, and Applicant hid them 
from the police by putting them in his mouth, which ultimately made him high, does not 
have the ring of truth and is just impossible to accept. His history of many years of 
criminal conduct together with this story makes his credibility extremely suspect.  
Because Applicant’s last arrest and conviction occurred in 2013 and his criminal 
conduct covered a long period of time, I do not find that any Criminal Conduct mitigating 
condition is applicable under AG ¶ 32. I, therefore, find Guideline J against Applicant. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment of the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 
7 
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. After reviewing Applicant's long history of alcohol use and abuse, including at 
least six alcohol related incidents, I find that the evidence is sufficient to raise 
disqualifying condition (a) in this case.   
 
(a) alcohol related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of the 
frequency of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23. Because of the long history of alcohol 
abuse evidence introduced and the evidence regarding criminal conduct relating to 
alcohol consumption for many years, I find that none of the mitigating factors is 
applicable in this case, and I find against Applicant under Guideline G.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Because of Applicant's history of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct I find that 
AG ¶ 16 (c) is applicable as a disqualifying condition in this case:   
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17. Because of the factors discussed above 
under the Guidelines for Criminal Conduct and Alcohol Consumption I find there is still 
concern that such conduct will recur and it continues to cast doubt on Applicant's 
 
8 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. I find that no mitigating factor under AG 
¶ 17 is applicable in this case.   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has had several delinquent debts for a number of years which were not 
resolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) in this 
case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
9 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Since the evidence has established Applicant has now resolved his delinquent 
debts, I find he has demonstrated that he addressed his debts in a responsible manner. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) has been established. Guideline F is found for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, J, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
10 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 4.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
