 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01055 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E 
(personal conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
April 27, 2017, and June 30, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on December 15, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 27, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for February 14, 2018. Applicant’s request for a continuance was 
granted on that date. The hearing was convened as rescheduled on March 20, 2018. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. Applicant submitted a document post-hearing that I have marked AE B and 
 
2 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 29, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since 2007. He did not graduate from 
high school. He married in 2004 and divorced in 2010. He has three children.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of not filing his state and federal tax returns and paying 
his taxes when they were due.2 IRS tax transcripts from February 2017 show the 
following:  
 
SOR TAX YEAR FILED AMOUNT OWED 
1.w (failure to pay) 2007 On time $468 
 
1.v (failure to pay) 2008 November 2009 $1,361 
1.q (failure to file) 2009 March 2012 $0 
 
1.q and 1.u (failure 
to file and pay) 
2010 March 2012 
 
$2,602 
1.t (failure to pay) 2011 On time $5,912  
 
1.q and 1.s (failure 
to file and pay) 
2012 January 2014 $6,368 
 
1.q and 1.r (failure 
to file and pay) 
2013  August 2016 $4,612 
Not alleged 2014 Not filed Not calculated3 
 
 
 Applicant’s state filed the following tax liens against him: $1,465 in 2007 (SOR ¶ 
1.g); $3,493 in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.h); $4,030 in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.i); and $4,306 in 2013 (SOR 
¶ 1.j).4 
 
 Applicant stated that all of his tax returns have been filed. He further stated that 
he had a payment plan with the IRS, but he was unable to maintain the payments. He is 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-27, 30-31; GE 1.  
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3.  
 
3 GE 2. The SOR did not allege that Applicant did not file his 2014 tax return. Any matter that was not 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing 
Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-
person analysis. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3.  
 
3 
unable to enter into another plan until he files his 2017 tax returns. He stated that he 
owes the IRS for tax years 2015 and 2016, and he will likely owe for 2017 because he 
did not have enough taxes withheld from his pay.5 
 
 The SOR alleges the tax issues identified above and 12 delinquent debts. The 
debts are listed on one or more credit reports. Applicant stated that he was the victim of 
identity theft. He retained a credit repair company to dispute debts on his credit report. A 
number of accounts were removed from his credit report. Applicant was unable to 
identify any of the debts alleged in the SOR to have resulted from identity theft.6 
 
 Applicant was a pedestrian when he was hit by a car in November 2015. He 
stated that he was denied short-term disability and was unable to pay his bills. He 
received a $9,000 settlement from the accident. He did not use any of the settlement 
money to pay his taxes or his delinquent debts. He stated that he used the money to 
help his family. His mother is a cancer survivor, and she also had heart surgery.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a collection account of $17,108. This reflects a lease of a car 
that Applicant was unable to pay after he was hit by a car. The car was repossessed. 
The March 2016 credit report lists the account as $707 past due with a balance of 
$17,108. The February 2018 credit report lists the account as a voluntary surrender with 
an $8,487 balance.8 
 
 Applicant’s child support payments are garnished from his pay. The January 
2015 credit report lists the payments as $1,284 past due with a balance of the same. 
The payments were not made while he was out of work after the car accident. The 
March 2016 credit report lists a balance of $1,605 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The arrearages are 
being paid because the February 2018 credit report lists the balance as $1,355.9 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.n appear to be the same accounts to a cable television 
provider. The January 2015 credit report lists the debt as a collection account with a 
$135 balance. The March 2016 credit report lists a balance of $735, but the February 
2018 credit report lists the balance as $402.10  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 19, 28-29, 38-41; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
6 Tr. at 15-18; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 37-38; AE B.  
 
8 Tr. at 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5.  
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5  
 
10 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5.  
 
 
4 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a charged-off debt without a balance. The January 2015 credit 
report lists the account as charged off and purchased by another lender, with a $0 
balance. The debt is not listed on the two most recent credit reports.11 
 
 The SOR alleges five medical debts, but the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.m appear to be to be duplicates. The four non-duplicate debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f, 1.k, 
1.p) total about $830. The $110 debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f is the only medical debt 
listed on the February 2018 credit report, but the creditor is not identified in the SOR or 
the credit report.12 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $65 debt to a collection company on behalf of a city 
(SOR ¶ 1.o). The debt is reported by TransUnion on the January 2015 credit report. It is 
not listed on the two more recent Equifax credit reports.13 
  
 Applicant recently had another car repossessed. He stated that the car broke 
down, the brakes went out, and the alternator died. He retained a tax professional to 
help him resolve his tax problems. He needs his job to pay his bills and help his mother. 
He stated that it will take time, but he is committed to paying his taxes and other 
debts.14 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2014. He reported that he was “currently utilizing, or seeking assistance 
from, a credit counseling service or other similar resource to resolve [his] financial 
problems.” He did not specifically report his failure to file his tax returns and pay his 
taxes and other debts. He denied intentionally falsifying the financial questions on the 
SF 86. He stated that he thought his tax returns had been filed.15  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 
2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
11 GE 3-5.  
 
12 GE 3-5.  
 
13 GE 3-5.  
 
14 Tr. at 34-35, 49; AE B  
 
15 Tr. at 23-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
5 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
6 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts, unpaid 
taxes, and tax returns that were not filed when they were due. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were adversely affected when he was hit by a car. The non-
tax debts are considered mitigated or not significant enough to be a trustworthiness 
concern. However, the crux of this case is Applicant’s state and federal tax issues.  
 
 Applicant’s tax issues go back a decade. The 2009 through 2013 federal returns 
have been filed, but the 2014 return had still not been filed as of February 2017. He 
owes a considerable amount to his state and the IRS, including for 2015, 2016, and 
 
7 
likely 2017. He had a payment plan with the IRS at one point, but it is of little use if 
every year he does not pay the taxes that are due for that year.  
 
 Applicant’s repeated failure to fulfill his tax obligations suggests that he does not 
possess the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted 
access to sensitive information and that he has a problem with complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 
at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). This is true even though the returns have been filed. See 
ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
  Applicant retained a tax professional to help him resolve his tax problems. He 
needs his job to pay his bills and help his mother. He stated that it will take time, but he 
is committed to paying his taxes. Intentions to pay debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
taxes. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(g) is applicable to the 
extent that Applicant filed his tax returns from 2009 through 2013, but it is insufficient to 
mitigate the judgment issues raised by Applicant’s years of shirking his responsibility to 
file his tax returns and pay his taxes. None of the other mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The trustworthiness concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as 
follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
8 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions in 2014. I have considered all the evidence, including Applicant’s 
age, education, experience, demeanor, testimony, and that Applicant reported on the 
questionnaire that he had financial problems. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that he intentionally falsified the questionnaire. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. Personal 
conduct trustworthiness concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. I conclude Applicant 
refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but he did not mitigate the 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q-1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
