1 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                        
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.16-00815 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For the Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant provided adequate information to mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
influence under Guideline B. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on December 11, 2015. After reviewing the 
report of the OPM security investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On July 29, 2016, 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 13, 2016. admitting six allegations 
under Guideline B (SOR 1.a, b, c, d, f, and g), and denying two allegations (SOR 1.e 
and h). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 27, 2017. The case 
was assigned to me on September 26, 2017. DOD issued a notice of hearing on 
February 27, 2018, for a hearing on March 19, 2018. I convened the case as scheduled. 
The Government offered three exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record 
without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1, 2, and 3. Applicant testified and 
offered ten exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through J. While I did not keep the record open, Applicant 
timely forwarded information concerning his nieces residing in the United States that I 
admitted into the record and considered as AX K. Department counsel had no objection 
to consideration of the information. (GX 4) I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on March 26, 2018. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGS), which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs, and 
are effective on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility under the new AGs. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning India, and provided relevant United States Department of State documents. 
(GX 3) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning India as noted in my Findings 
of Fact.  
 
Applicant was advised at the hearing that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (GX 2) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. Applicant noted that some of the information reported by the security 
investigator was not clear. (GX 2, at page 7) After the information and report were 
clarified for Applicant, he did not object to the admissibility of the PSI summary. (Tr. 13-
18) I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 47 years old. He was born in India and received all 
of his education in India. He came to the United States in 2000 for work, and was 
sponsored by a bank as a computer engineer on an H1 professional worker visa. He 
3 
 
became a U.S. citizen in 2013, and formally renounced his Indian citizenship which was 
accepted and approved by the Indian authorities. (Tr. 31-32, 38-39; AX J, Citizenship 
Renunciation). He worked for various U.S. Government agencies as a contractor 
computer engineer, and received a public trust position in 2002. There are no reports of 
any problems or issues concerning his access to sensitive public trust information. 
 
 Applicant married in India in 2002, and his wife came to the United States in 
approximately 2003. She became a U.S. citizen in 2017. He has two children born in the 
United States who are U.S. citizens. His yearly income is approximately $100,000, and 
his wife’s yearly income is approximately $125,000. He has approximately $43,000 in 
his 401(K), and his wife has approximately $75,000 in her 401(k). He usually travels to 
India once a year and stays for approximately a week or two. One niece is the only 
family member that has visited him in the United States. (Tr.19-20, 33-34, 39-40, 51-54; 
AX A, Applicant’s wife U.S. Citizenship document; AX B, Applicant’s U.S. citizenship 
document) 
 
 The SOR alleges (SOR 1.a), at the time it was drafted, that Applicant’s wife is a 
citizen of India. Applicant established that his wife is now a United States citizen.  
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits in part that his five siblings and his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. (SOR 1.b and 1.c) 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he has family members who are citizens 
and residents of India. (SOR 1.d) The SOR alleges that his wife has siblings and family 
members who are citizens and residents of India. (SOR 1.e) He denies the allegation in 
part because two brothers-in-law are permanent residents of the United States and 
have applied for United States citizenship. The SOR alleges that Applicant has two 
college friends who are citizens and residents of India. (SOR 1.f) Applicant denies this 
in part since one of the friends is now a permanent resident of the United States. The 
SOR alleges that he owns property in India valued at $75,000 (SOR 1.g). He admits 
that he jointly owns with his brothers-in-law investment property in India valued at 
approximately $75,000. The SOR also alleges that he sent $100,000 yearly to India to 
support to his father and siblings (SOR 1.h). He denies that he sends $100,000 a year 
to support his father and siblings. He admits sending support to his father over many 
years for medical and elder care that may amount to $100,000.  
 
 Applicant has five siblings who are citizens and residents of India. They are 
farmers and housewives and have no affiliation with the government. He is the fourth 
sibling, and the three oldest are over 55 years of age. He tried to get them to come and 
live in the United States, but they are concerned because they do not speak English. He 
has sponsored a number of their children, his nieces and nephews, for schooling, work, 
and residence in the United States. He is still trying to convince his youngest siblings to 
come to the United States. He usually communicates with his siblings by phone some 
weekly, some monthly, some only a few times a year. He sees them when he travels to 
India. (Tr.35-36, 39-40) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s father–in-law died in September 2016. His mother-in-law is a 
housewife in her late 60s, and does not like to travel. He talks to her occasionally by 
phone when his wife talks to her. (Tr. 36) 
 
 Some of Applicant’s and his wife’s extended family members are citizens or 
residents of India. His wife has two siblings who are residents of the United States and 
are seeking permanent residency so they can become U.S. citizens. One sibling is a 
farmer in India. The other is a homemaker and resides with her husband, a merchant, in 
Singapore. Applicant and his wife are supporting their quest to come to the United 
States. Applicant has very limited if any contact with his wife’s siblings that reside in 
India. (Tr. 36, 44-46) 
 
 Applicant admits he has two friends from college that he occasionally contacts. 
One is still a resident and citizen of India. He has contact with this friend about once 
every six months. The other is a resident of the United States and he sees him also 
about every six months. (Tr. 36-37; AX D and E, Permanent Resident Card and Driver’s 
License) 
 
 Applicant admits he owns an interest in property in India which he purchased in 
partnership with his brothers-in-law before becoming a United States citizen. His 
brothers-in-law have been permanent residents of the United States for over ten years. 
The purchase price for the land was $75,000, but it is now valued at approximately 
$65,000. The property was purchased as an investment with the hopes of building on 
the property and renting it. However, there has been no attempt to construct a building 
on the property and the land is still vacant. They tried to sell the property for almost two 
years, but they are missing a legal document and the value has decreased to the extent 
that it is not a good time to sell. (Tr. 45-49; AX F, G, H, and I, Permanent Resident and 
Driver’s Licenses)  
 
 Applicant admits sending money to his father in India when he was alive for 
medical and geriatric care as a payback for funding his education. Even though his 
father has deceased, he will send money to his siblings and their family members if 
asked and it is needed. Over the years, he may have sent approximately $100,000 to 
his family in India. Since his father passed away, he sends no more than a few 
thousand dollars at a time, and no more than $15,000 a year. (Tr. 56-58) 
 
 India is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 
1.2 billion people. The United States and India share common values including the rule 
of law, respect for diversity, and democratic government. The United States Department 
of State reported in 2012 that bilateral defense and counterterrorism cooperation 
between the United States and India had grown to unprecedented levels, In 2009, the 
United States and India launched the United States-India strategic dialogue which is a 
bilateral forum focused on strengthening cooperation between the two countries in 
several areas, including energy, climate change, trade, education, and counterterrorism. 
The United States supports a reformed United Nations Security Council that includes 
India as a permanent member. The United States is one of India’s largest trade and 
5 
 
investment partners. In January 2015, President Obama and Indian Prime Minister Modi 
lauded the close and growing ties between the United States and India.  
 
 The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage identified India, along with seven other countries, as being involved 
in criminal espionage of United States trade secrets. There were export control 
enforcement cases in 2008 against India or Indian businesses. There have been recent 
criminal cases in the United States concerning export enforcement, economic 
espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving 
both the government of India and private companies and individuals in India.  
 
 India and Pakistan have been locked in a tense rivalry since the partition of the 
subcontinent following independence from Great Britain in 1947. India continues to 
experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. citizens. Anti-Western 
terrorist groups, some on the United States Government’s list of foreign terrorist 
organizations, are active in India. India remains subject to violent terrorist attacks and 
continues to be one of the most persistently targeted countries by transnational and 
domestic terrorist groups.  
 
 According to the United States Department of State’s 2016 Human Rights 
Report, the most significant human rights problems in India were police and security 
force abuses, including extra judicial killings, torture, rape, and widespread corruption at 
all level of government. The United States and India share a number of security 
perspectives, including, those on China, and the Asian balance of power, terrorism, 
Afghanistan, maritime issues, and weapons of mass destruction. India also has a long-
standing military supply relationships with Russia, and Russia remains India’s largest 
supplier of military systems and spare parts. India has remained reticent to discuss its 
nuclear security measures or allow inspections. India has also refused to accede to the 
nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty despite United States policy supporting its universality.1  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
1 GX 3, Request for Administrative Notice and Supporting Documents. 
6 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for security eligibility 
will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn 
only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the United 
States interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not 
limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States. Even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
7 
 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government and its relationship with the United States are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that his five siblings, his mother-in-law, 
and various relatives and friends are citizens and residents of India. Applicant’s family 
members and friends who are citizens and residents of India are a foreign influence 
security concern.  
 
 Four disqualifying conditions are relevant to the security concerns raised in the 
SOR under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive or classified information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, that could subject 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.   
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(d), 7(e), and 7(f) requires substantial 
evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these 
disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. It denotes a risk greater than the 
normal risk inherent in having a family member or contacts living under a foreign 
government. The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships must be examined to 
determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. The Government has established that Applicant’s 
family in India may be under a “heightened risk” of security concern because of the 
8 
 
potential for criminal espionage targeted at the United States, terrorist activities and 
threats, targeted intelligence activities, and human rights violations in India. An applicant 
with foreign family or friendship ties to a country that presents a heightened risk has a 
heavy burden of persuasion to show that neither he nor the family members are subject 
to influence by that country. The totality of an applicant’s family and friends ties to a 
foreign country as well as the ties to the country for each individual person must be 
considered.  
 
 Applicant raised facts to mitigate the security concerns arising from his family 
members and friends in India. I have considered the following Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 In evaluating the potential conflict of interest because Applicant’s family members 
are citizens and residents of India, I considered that India is a strong ally of the United 
States with mutual defense and strategic interests; that India is a substantial trading 
partner of the United States; and that India cooperates with the United States on many 
military matters. A friendly relationship is not determinative, but it makes it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a United States citizen through 
relatives or associates in that country. Even friendly countries may engage in espionage 
against the United States’ economic, scientific, or technical interest. I have also 
considered the on-going situation in India with extensive terrorist activities and human 
rights issues. Even though India is not a hostile country and its interests are not inimical 
to the United States, it is reasonable to consider that the terrorist situation and groups in 
India could take an action that may jeopardize their friendly position with the United 
9 
 
States. There are indications that elements in India could seek sensitive information 
from their citizens who have family in the United States.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s relationship with his siblings, mother–in-law, family 
members, and friends who are citizens or residents of India. Applicant has been open 
and candid about his foreign relatives. There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts 
with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual. Factors such as 
an applicant’s relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities to contact them in 
the past do not provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s family 
circumstances pose a security concern.  
 
 Applicant’s contacts with his family members in India, are close and frequent. 
Applicant talks to them often, almost weekly. His contact with his friends is not close or 
as frequent. Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the contacts and 
communications with most of his family members are not casual. The communications 
and contacts between Applicant and his family members are frequent and substantial. 
These family members could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Because 
of the terrorist activity in India, Applicant may likely be placed in a position of having to 
choose between these family members and the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (c) do not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant has strong ties to the United States. He came to the United States 
under the professional worker’s visa program. He worked as a contractor for various 
U.S. Government agencies and was granted a public trust clearance. There were no 
issues raised concerning his access to sensitive public trust information. He has 
excelled in his occupation and owns his own business. He became a U.S. citizen at the 
first opportunity. His wife and children are U.S. citizens. Applicant has shown that he 
embraces the culture, values, history, and lifestyle of the United States. Applicant’s has 
substantial financial assets in the United States that offset the value of the undeveloped 
land in India. His limited and shared interest in the land in India is unlikely to result in a 
conflict and cannot be used to influence or pressure Applicant. He has firm ties to the 
United States and considers it home.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is unquestioned. He has immediate family 
members who are citizens and residents of the United States. He has enabled and 
encouraged other family members to come to and live in the United States and become 
United States citizens. Applicant has established that it is unlikely that he could be 
placed in a position to choose between any sense of loyalty or obligation to his family 
members in India and his sense of loyalty or obligation to the United States. In 
balancing all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I am satisfied Applicant’s 
loyalty to the United States is such that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States interest. There is no risk to the national interest if 
Applicant has access to classified information. The mitigating conditions in AG ¶¶ 8(b) 
and 8(f) apply.  
 
10 
 
 Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his family members and friends 
who are citizens and residents of India do not cause a security concern. I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not single items in isolation, to 
reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Applicant has contact with family members and property interests in India. 
However, Applicant established that he has such strong relationships and loyalties in 
and to the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. While access to classified information is not based on a 
finding of loyalty to the United States, Applicant established his deep and abiding 
commitment to the protection of United States interests. Applicant and his immediate 
family are residents of the United States and solely United States citizens. These facts 
leave me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has met the 
heavy burden of mitigating potential security concerns arising from family members and 
property interests in India. Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns and 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
