 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03883 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s two instances of marijuana use are mitigated by the passage of 
time. It is unlikely that he will engage in similar conduct again and has signed a 
statement of intent to that effect. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)1 detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement and substance misuse guideline.2 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 This title change is effective as of the implementation of the 2017 adjudicative guidelines.   
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.3 The 
Government submitted its written case on March 31, 2017. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on April 6, 2017 and did not respond. The items appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 59, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
November 2009. He was granted access to classified information in March 2011. 
Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in February 2016 in 
conjunction with a periodic reinvestigation and disclosed two occasions of marijuana 
use.4  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant used marijuana with a friend after learning of a 
mutual friend’s death. Applicant said he did so without thinking. He used again in May 
2014 in an attempt to bond with his estranged son whom he had not seen in many 
years. In his September 2016 background interview, Applicant expressed regret for his 
conduct, calling it “stupid.” He has no intention to use the drug in the future, and in his 
SOR answer provided a signed statement to that effect with revocation of national 
security eligibility for any future violations.5  
 
 In addition to disclosing the drug use on his 2016 security clearance application, 
Applicant also reported the use to his supervisor. Applicant does not believe the 
incidents can be used as a source of exploitation in the future.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
3 GE 2. 
 
4  GE 4-5. 
 
5 GE 2, 4, 6.  
 
6 GE 4, 6.  
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis  
  
 The illegal use of controlled substances can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness, because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
 
4 
 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.7 Applicant’s admissions 
establishes a prima facie case he used illegal drugs, and did so after being granted 
access to classified information.8 Applicant’s use of marijuana while holding a security 
clearance places a heavy burden on Applicant to establish mitigation. After considering 
the record as a whole, specifically, the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s limited 
use of marijuana, the length of time that has since that limited use, and Applicant’s 
remorse for his actions, I conclude that applicant has met his heavy burden of proof and 
persuasion. 
 
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred in May 2014. The Directive does not 
define "recent," and there is no "bright-line" definition of what constitutes "recent" 
conduct.9 The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a 
reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant's conduct.10 Applicant’s 
misconduct is mitigated by the passage of time and does not reflect negatively on his 
current security worthiness.11 He voluntarily disclosed his misconduct to his supervisor 
and during his security clearance adjudication. It cannot be used as a source of 
vulnerability or exploitation. Furthermore, Applicant has acknowledged the seriousness 
of his misconduct and has repeatedly expressed remorse. He also signed a statement 
of intent to abstain from illegal drug use in the future with automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any violation.12  
 Based on the record, I have no reservations about Applicant’s current security 
worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors 
at AG ¶ 2(d). A finding that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
conduct in no way diminishes the seriousness of his illegal conduct. However, it is not 
the purpose of a security clearance case to punish or sanction a person for their past 
actions. Rather, it is a predictive risk assessment based on the past conduct. Applicant 
has taken responsibility for his misconduct. Most important, Applicant self-reported his 
misconduct to his supervisor and on his 2016 security clearance application. He also 
spoke candidly about the instances of illegal drug use during his background 
investigation. Applicant’s self reporting and candid disclosures without regard for its 
consequences also lends credibility to his statement of intent that he will abstain from 
illegal drug use in the future.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7  See, AG ¶ 24.  
 
8 AG ¶ 25 (a) and (f).  
 
9 ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). 
 
11 AG ¶ 26 (a).   
 
12 AG ¶ 26 (b).   
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for continued access 
to classified information is granted 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
