 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03308 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 3, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 6, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 13, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 20, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was 
left open until April 2, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. Nothing, apart from 
 
2 
 
his testimony, was submitted by Applicant. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(TR) on March 28, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Arab Republic of Egypt. (GX 3.) Department Counsel provided a 5-
page summary of the facts, supported by five attached Items. The documents provide 
elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts 
included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since 2012. (GX 1 at pages 12~13.) 
He is married to a U.S. citizen, and has two teenage children by this third marriage. (TR 
at page 15 line 7 to page 20 line 10, page 22 line 23 to page 23 line 5, and GX 1 at 
pages 19~22.) Applicant’s two prior spouses were also U.S. citizens. (Id.) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1986 at the age of 19, and became a U.S. 
citizen in 1991. (TR at page 15 line 7 to page 20 line 10.) He owns three properties in 
the United States, valued well in excess of $2,500,000. (TR at page 39 line 19 to page 
43 line 9.) Applicant has an Egyptian sister and four Egyptian brothers, none of whom 
know Applicant’s employer, nor what Applicant’s work entails. (TR at page 24 line 10 to 
page 33 line 25, and at page 34 lines 1~13.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant’s 63-year old sister is a citizen and resident of Egypt. (GX 1 at 
page 25.) She is a retired “Certified Public Accountant,” and his contact with her is 
“infrequent.” (TR at page 24 line 10 to page 26 line 7.) He last saw his sister in the 
“summer of 2012,” when he was in Egypt on business for his employer. (TR at page 28 
line 1~13.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s 60-year old brother is a citizen of Egypt, but has resided in 
Kuwait for about the last 20 years. (GX 1 at page 26.) He works for “the Municipal City 
of Kuwait,” maintaining its sewer system. (TR at page 26 line 8 to page 27 line 12.) He 
last saw this brother “over two and a half years ago.” (TR at page 27 lines 16~25.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant’s 59-year old brother is a citizen of Egypt, but resides in Saudi 
Arabia. (GX 1 at page 30.) He is an engineer, working with automobiles. (TR at page 28 
line 14 to page 29 line 5.) Applicant’s contact with this brother is infrequent. (Id.) 
 
 
3 
 
 1.d. Applicant has 57-year old twin brothers who are citizens and residents of 
Egypt. (GX 1 at pages 27~29.) One is retired, and the other a construction inspector. 
(TR at page 29 line 6 to page 33 line 25.) Applicant’s contact with these two brothers is 
also infrequent. (Id.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant co-owns with his spouse an apartment in the United Arab Emirates 
(Dubai) valued at about $545,000. (TR at page 34 line 18 to page 39 line 18, and at 
page 47 line 15 to page 48 line 17.) He, with his immediate family, live in this apartment 
when he is employed by his U.S. defense contractor employer in Dubai. (Id.) Applicant 
also uses it as a vacation home. (TR at page 34 line 18 to page 39 line 18, and at page 
47 line 15 to page 48 line 17.) The value of this apartment pales in comparison with the 
value of his property assets in the United States, as noted above.  
 
 1.f. Applicant also co-owns with his spouse an apartment in the Egypt valued 
only about $20,000. (TR at page 20 line 11 to page 21 line 5, and at page 34 lines 14~ 
17.) 
  
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding to the Arab Republic 
of Egypt (Egypt). The U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens of threats from 
terrorists groups in Egypt and to consider the risks of travel to the country. Political 
protests also  occur without warning throughout Egypt.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
5 
 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest  
 
  Applicant has Egyptian siblings living through the Middle East. He also owns an 
apartment in Dubai worth about $545,000, and one in Egypt worth about $20,000. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant’s loyalties are to the United States, where has lived since the age of 
19, has an American wife and native born American children. His contact with his 
Egyptian siblings, two of whom are retired, is infrequent at best. Finally, the value of his 
Dubai and Egyptian apartments pale in comparison with the value of his properties in 
the United States. Foreign Influence is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence 
security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
