 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02958 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 10, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 24, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 23, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 23, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 15, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record was left open 
until March 30, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. Applicant offered four sets 
of documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through D, which were also 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 
23, 2018. 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year old truck driver. (GX 1 at pages 5 and 10.) She has been 
married for about “10 and a half years,” and her husband is also a truck driver. (TR at 
page 13 line 6 to page 14 line 23.) From about December of 2014 to September of 2015, 
Applicant dissipated their approximately $8,000 of savings to satisfy the needs of her 2~3 
online boyfriends. (TR at page 28 line 12 to page 32 line 21, and at page 37 lines 2~14.) 
This appears to be the root cause of Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. She has 
virtually no savings, and depends on payday advances to meet her family’s financial 
needs. (TR at page 42 lines 10~21.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant is indebted to the Social Security Administration (SSA) for about 
$17,188 as a result of unemployment disability benefits received, despite her and her 
spouse returning to work. (TR at page 15 line 3 to page 18 line 24.) Applicant has been 
aware of this overpayment since March of 2014 (AppX A), but has yet to address this 
substantial debt. This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. and 1.d. Applicant denies that she is indebted to a medical provider for two 
past-due debts totaling about $1,411. She avers that these debts have been satisfied; 
and as they do not appear as past-due on the Government’s most recent December 2017 
credit report (GX 5), these allegations are found for Applicant. 
 
 1.c. Applicant denies this allegation, and avers that she “settled” a past-due debt 
of about $332 to a utility company. (TR at page 20 lines 21~25.) As Applicant has offered 
nothing further in this regard; and as this debt does appears on the Governments most 
recent December 2017 credit report (GX 5), this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant denies this allegation, and avers that she “satisfied” a past-due credit 
card debt of about $136. (TR at page 21 lines 8~23.) As this debt does not appear on the 
Governments most recent December 2017 credit report (GX 5), this allegation is found 
for Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denies this allegation, and avers that she knows of no outstanding 
judgment for about $588. (TR at page 21 line 28 to page 23 line 10.) As this outstanding 
judgment does not appear on the Governments most recent December 2017 credit report 
(GX 5), this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denies this allegation, and avers that she “paid . . . in full” a past-
due credit card debt of about $523. (TR at page 23 lines 11~18.) As this debt does not 
appear on the Governments most recent December 2017 credit report (GX 5), this 
allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admits this allegation, and avers that she was “ready to pay” a past-
due fitness center debt of about $396. She avers that she called the creditor and “they 
had no record of it.” (TR at page 23 line 19 to page 24 line 11.) It appears that Applicant 
 
3 
 
is making a good-faith effort to satisfy this debt; and as this debt does not appear on the 
Government’s most recent December 2017 credit report (GX 5), this allegation is found 
for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 2.a. As noted above, from about December of 2014 to September of 2015, 
Applicant dissipated their savings to satisfy the needs of her 2~3 online boyfriends. (TR 
at page 28 line 12 to page 32 line 21, and at page 37 lines 2~14.) In light of Applicant’s 
substantial past-due indebtedness; also noted above, her judgment is questionable, at 
best. Applicant could have used the approximately $10,000~$12,000 she paid to these 
individuals, and instead addressed her SSA and utility debts, alleged in ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
  
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
 
4 
 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order (EO)  10865, “Any determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her testimony, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG 
¶ 19(b) (“indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending”), and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of these apply to allegations 1.a. and 1.c. Applicant failed to meet her burden 
to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.c. against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
Based on Applicant’s questionable financial conduct while online, the following 
disqualifying condition does apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment . . . . 
 
Applicant, instead of using her savings to pay her substantial SSA past-due debt, 
used it to cater to online foreign nationals. 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(b):  the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
 
6 
 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c):   the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g): association with persons involved in criminal activities was 
unwitting, has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt 
upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them apply. 
Applicant has not shown that a similar lapse in judgment is unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her Financial Considerations and related Personal Conduct. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.c.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b., 1.d.-1.h.: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
