 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-01577 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Paul J. Malone, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his use of alcohol. His request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On March 17, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. On March 9, 2017, he completed a personal 
subject interview (PSI) with a government investigator. Based on the results of the 
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could 
 
 
2 
 
 
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On July 31, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline for alcohol consumption 
(Guideline G). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on January 24, 2018, and convened the requested hearing on 
March 6, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibits 
(AX) A – F. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I received a transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 15, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant disclosed in his PSI 
that he had driven while intoxicated every four or five months (SOR 1.a) and that he had 
done so as recently as the weekend before his PSI (SOR 1.b). In response, Applicant 
admitted, with explanations, both allegations. In addition to the facts thus established, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. In May 2011, he graduated magna cum laude from a 
state university with a bachelor’s degree in engineering. Appellant’s academic 
achievements included numerous awards for honors and membership in elite academic 
and professional societies. He has worked as an engineer for his current employer since 
March 2016. From August 2011 until February 2016, he worked in a similar position for a 
different defense contractor. Applicant’s performance evaluations for the period 2013 
through 2017 reflect excellent work, professionalism, good character, and potential for 
success. Appellant also became an Eagle Scout before attending college. (GX 1; AX D; 
AX E; Tr. 18 – 19.) 
 
 Appellant first received a security clearance through sponsorship by his previous 
employer. He currently is trying to obtain eligibility for a top secret clearance with access 
to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). To that end, he knows he will have to 
complete a polygraph examination. Applicant has never been arrested for any alcohol-
related offense. But for the information he disclosed in his PSI, he has never been 
involved with any documented alcohol-related misconduct that resulted in involuntary 
counseling or disciplinary proceedings. He has never been diagnosed with or treated for 
alcohol abuse or dependence. Nonetheless, during his March 9, 2017, personal subject 
interview (PSI) with a government investigator, Applicant disclosed that he had, at times, 
driven after consuming alcohol. He opined in the PSI that he may have been legally 
intoxicated on some of those occasions, including most recently during the weekend 
before the PSI. (Answer; GX 2; Tr. 46 – 47) 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant began using alcohol in college. Persons who have known him during and 
after college over the past decade have never known Applicant’s use of alcohol to be 
abusive or in any way problematic. He usually drank beer and was never out of control. 
A co-worker since 2016 testified that Applicant never abused alcohol at company or social 
gatherings, and confirmed that Applicant abstains from alcohol whenever they are at 
social gatherings together. Applicant’s fiancée has known him for ten years. She 
characterized Applicant’s alcohol use as moderate after college (no more than two or 
three beers on any one occasion).  
 
 In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated he drank one or two pints of beer 
two or three nights weekly, and three or four pints every other weekend. In response to 
interrogatories, Applicant stated he was last intoxicated in June 2017. Applicant’s fiancée 
testified that after his PSI in March 2017, Applicant changed his approach to alcohol and 
greatly moderated his drinking. Other witnesses also testified as to their observations of 
the change in Applicant’s behavior after the PSI, and characterized his use of alcohol 
after March 2017 as “restrained.” Another long-time associate wrote that Applicant takes 
the security clearance process very seriously and that he has been very concerned about 
any personal conduct that would cast doubt on his suitability for clearance. (Answer; GX 
2; AX B; Tr. 22 – 41) 
 
 After receiving the SOR, Applicant stopped drinking. He also enrolled in an alcohol 
awareness and recovery program that is a variation of Alcoholics Anonymous. Applicant’s 
attendance and participation in that program continues and has been very productive. 
The program’s coordinator, a clinical psychologist, corroborated Applicant’s claim of 
abstention from alcohol and endorsed his sobriety as sincere and reliable. The 
coordinator also determined that Applicant has never been addicted to alcohol. (Answer; 
AX B; AX C; Tr. 50) 
 
 Applicant also sought alcohol counseling from his company’s employee assistance 
program (EAP) and received a positive evaluation of his alcohol use from a licensed 
professional counselor to whom he was referred by EAP. That evaluation corroborated 
Applicant’s efforts to maintain sobriety, and stated that Applicant does not have a problem 
with alcohol. As such, his prognosis for continued sobriety is good. (Answer; AX A; Tr. 
49) 
 
 Applicant has changed the way he socializes with his friends and coworkers. 
Whereas before he would go to craft breweries on weekends, he now engages in other 
events that do not emphasize alcohol consumption. (Answer; Tr. 54 – 56) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,2 
                                                 
2 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 Applicant’s disclosures about his use of alcohol reasonably raised a security 
concern that is stated at AG ¶ 21, as follows: 
                                                 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
More specifically, Applicant’s disclosures require application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 22(a): 
 
alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Although never arrested with an alcohol-related offense or diagnosed with any 
alcohol use disorder, Applicant disclosed drinking sufficient quantities of beer that support 
the likelihood that he may have driven while intoxicated as recently as March 2017. By 
contrast, and more important, Applicant was concerned he may have a problem with 
alcohol that would undermine his suitability for access to classified information if left 
unaddressed. To his great credit, Applicant moderated his drinking after his PSI and 
stopped altogether after receiving the SOR. Further, he presented information from 
longtime friends and associates, and from professional counselors, that shows he has 
stopped drinking. Applicant’s information also shows he is unlikely to engage in adverse 
alcohol-related misconduct in the future. 
 
 All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 23 mitigating 
conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program. 
 
 On balance, I conclude Applicant’s use of alcohol does not pose a disqualifying 
security risk. He has mitigated the concerns raised under this guideline. 
 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has an excellent record of professional, academic, and personal 
 
 
6 
 
 
accomplishments. Friends and professional associates, who have known Applicant for 
most of the past decade, regard him as a person of great reliability and character. 
Applicant has no record of adverse conduct, yet felt compelled to ensure that he 
addressed his concerns about his alcohol use to the satisfaction of the Government. His 
candor and his actions regarding counseling and sobriety are sufficient to satisfy the 
security concerns raised by the Government’s information. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the record as a whole shows that the security concerns presented in the 
SOR are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
