KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: It is well-settled that administrative agencies, such as DOHA, have limited authority.  
DOHA Judges, whether those in the Hearing Office or on the Appeal Board, have no authority to
entertain constitutional challenges to statutes, regulations, or, as in this case, a General Order
promulgated by a military commander.  DOHA proceedings are intended to adjudicate security
eligibility of individual applicants and not as a forum to pass judgment on Federal laws or
processes.  Moreover, the due process rights that an applicant enjoys are those provided by
Executive Order 10865 at Section 3 and by the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02862.a1
DATE: 05/22/2018
DATE: May 22, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02862
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ronald Payne, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 20, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 12, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge denied him due process;
whether the Judge was biased against him; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born and educated in Afghanistan.  He worked as a contractor for the U.S.
military during the mid-2000s.  During that time, he received a letter from the enemy threatening
to kill him if he did not quit his job.  Later, while working for another contractor, Applicant was
videoed with high-ranking U.S. officers in Afghanistan.  These videos were made available to the
public.  Applicant stated that this exposure was “not a good thing.”  Decision at 2.  He believed that
it was risky for him to be seen under those circumstances. 
Applicant was concerned that if he continued working for the U.S. in Afghanistan, his life
would be in danger.  He came to the U.S. on a special visa and became a naturalized citizen of this
country a few years ago.  Applicant’s wife, children, parents, siblings, and in-laws are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan.  He has one sibling who lives in another country because he had been
targeted by terrorists in Afghanistan.  Applicant has visited his family in Afghanistan “at varying
intervals” over the past ten years.  In a 2014 interview, he disclosed that he provided about $1,000
to $1,500 every three months to his father in Afghanistan.  Applicant does not own a house in the
U.S., nor does he own property in Afghanistan.  His assets in the U.S. are worth about $230,000.  
In 2010, while working for a contractor, Applicant received a verbal warning after a co-
worker accused him of making racist remarks.  A year later he received a written warning for having
conducted a prohibited personal relationship with a female employee.  The warning stated that the
misconduct violated General Order No. 1 and that he would be recommended for termination. 
Although he denied these allegations, Applicant resigned in lieu of termination.  In 2015, Applicant
was again terminated from employment due to failure to be present for duty.  Applicant denied that
he had committed the offense.  When completing his security clearance application (SCA),
Applicant did not disclose these resignations/terminations.  He stated that, for the earlier one, he
believed that it was too old to report.  Concerning the second, he stated that he thought he had been
released rather than terminated.  The Judge found these explanations to be lacking credibility.  She
found that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his job terminations.
Afghanistan is a country in which terrorists operate, planning attacks against U.S. and
coalition forces.  The Afghani government struggles to assert control over regions in which terrorists
2
find safe haven.  There is widespread disregard for the law and little accountability for those who
violate it.  The country is an important partner with the U.S. in the fight against terrorism.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Under Guideline B, the Judge noted Applicant’s close relationship with his family in
Afghanistan, the danger to those living or visiting there, and the presence of terrorist groups in the
country.  Though noting Applicant’s loyalty and devotion when working with the U.S., and paying
special attention to the dangers he has undergone in support of U.S. operations, the Judge cited to
evidence that Applicant had been personally threatened.  She also cited to the videos that depicted
Applicant working with U.S. personnel, which could garner him unwanted attention.  All in all, the
Judge concluded that Applicant could well be subjected to pressure by those seeking classified
information.
Under Guideline E, the Judge stated that Applicant’s explanations for his omissions were not
credible.  She found insufficient evidence that he had made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the
omissions.  She described these omissions as “not minor.”  Decision at 13.  She stated that Applicant
had not taken steps to alleviate factors that had led to his omissions and that she could not conclude
that such conduct would not likely recur.  Though citing to evidence of Applicant’s service to the
U.S., she ultimately concluded that he had not met his burden of persuasion.
Discussion
Applicant contends that he was denied due process.  He argues that the Judge violated his
due process rights by limiting his effort to present a case for mitigation.  He cites to various cases
by the U.S. Supreme Court, Federal Appeals Courts, and cases by the Court of Appeals for the
Armed Forces and the military service courts.  Among other things, he argues that the Judge erred
by not permitting him to challenge the constitutionality of General Order No. 1, an alleged violation
of which resulted in one of his job terminations.
It is well-settled that administrative agencies, such as DOHA, have limited authority.  See,
e.g., Thunder Basin Coal Company v. Reich, 510 U.S. 200, 215 (1994).  DOHA Judges, whether
those in the Hearing Office or on the Appeal Board, have no authority to entertain constitutional
challenges to statutes, regulations, or, as in this case, a General Order promulgated by a military
commander.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-01961 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2007).  It is also well-settled
that DOHA proceedings are intended to adjudicate security eligibility of individual applicants and
not as a forum to pass judgment on Federal laws or processes.  See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 03-06174
at 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 14-03734 at 3 and fn. 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2016). 
Moreover, the due process rights that an applicant enjoys are those provided by Executive Order
10865 at Section 3 and by the Directive.  See Directive, Encl. 1.  In the case before us, the Judge
complied with the Executive Order and the Directive, permitting Applicant to present evidence and
to testify at length.  She told Applicant that he could provide her with copies of the cases that he
believed relevant and she would consider them, although she was not bound by them.  Tr. at 12. 
3
This was not erroneous.  Applicant was not denied the administrative due process afforded him by
the Executive Order and the Directive.   
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him.  Bias involves partiality for or
against a party, predisposition to decide a case or issue without regard to the merits, or other indicia
of a lack of impartiality.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased,
and a party seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-09421 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 15, 2017).  Adverse rulings alone do not demonstrate
judicial bias.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-05047 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2017).
In the case before us, the Judge questioned Applicant off and on during the hearing,
sometimes at length.  On the whole, this appears to have been in attempt to clarify Applicant’s
testimony, which, in some instances, appeared confusing.  He argues that the Judge did not permit
him to present constitutional challenges to some of the Government’s evidence.  However, the
Judge’s rulings on evidence and any limitations she may have placed on the scope of Applicant’s
presentation were not indicative of an inflexible predisposition to decide the case adversely to him. 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge was impartial.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s rulings on evidence, contending that the Judge based her
decision on inadmissible hearsay.  Applicant does not specify which pieces of documentary evidence
he believes to have been inadmissible.  We note  that the Judge told Applicant that she would sustain
any objection he might have to two written summaries of his clearance interviews.  Applicant did
not object to any of the Government’s proffered documents.  Tr. at 20-21.  Even if Applicant had
not waived this issue, the remaining documents were admissible under Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  We find
no error in the Judge’s evidentiary rulings.
The balance of Applicant’s brief is, in effect, an argument that the Judge either did not
consider certain pieces of evidence or that she mis-weighed the evidence.  He cites to evidence of
his undeniable bravery in support of U.S. operations and to other things that were favorable to him. 
The Judge made findings about Applicant’s many laudable qualities, especially his devotion to his
family and his service to the U.S.  However, her analysis focused on evidence that Applicant had
already come to the attention of terrorist forces who had threatened his life and that he had been
publicly identified as someone cooperating with U.S. forces, as well as his many family connections
in Afghanistan.  Her conclusion that he may well come to the attention of those who might use his
family members as a means of coercion is sustainable.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption
that the Judge considered all of the evidence, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257
at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2017).  Applicant also challenges the Judge’s conclusions about the lack of
believability of his explanations for his SCA omissions.  We give deference to the Judge’s
credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to
undermine the Judge’s credibility determination in this case.    
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
4
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.        
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
