 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00269 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) by his record of counseling for substandard performance of duty and 
punishment for dereliction of duty. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
 
2 
 
31, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018. On February 6, 2018, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for February 26, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
March 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old help-desk technician employed by a defense contractor 
since February 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1998 to 2001, 
completed college and received a bachelor’s degree, and then reenlisted in 2004. (Tr. 
50.) In November 2015, he was honorably discharged as an information system 
technician second class (IT2). (AX A.) While on active duty, he was awarded the Navy 
and Marine Corps Achievement Medal four times, along with numerous service medals, 
ribbons, and qualification badges. He held a security clearance while on active duty. 
 
 Applicant served in several shore-based assignments, including one overseas 
deployment as an information system technician first class (IT1) before being assigned 
to sea duty in July 2014 as a work center supervisor. His early performance evaluations 
as an IT1 rated him as a top performer. (AX B at 11-16.) His evaluation report for 
November 2012 to November 2013 rated him as “above standards” in all traits except 
one, for which he was rated as “greatly exceeds standards.” This report rated him as 
“must promote” and includes the comment: “strongly recommended for advancement to 
chief petty officer, promote immediately.” (AX B at 9-10.) In September 2013, he applied 
for a commission as a limited duty officer. His application was strongly supported by his 
commanding officer. (AX D.) The record does not reflect the status of his application. 
 
 Applicant’s evaluation report for November 2013 to July 2014, before reporting to 
his ship, rated him as “meets standards” in one performance trait, “above standards” in 
two traits, and “greatly exceeds standards” in two traits. This report rated him as an “early 
promote.” (AX B at 7-8.) His evaluation report for July to November 2014, his first report 
aboard his ship, rated him as “meets standards” in all performance traits and rated his 
promotion potential as “promotable.” This report commented that he “hit the deck plates 
running” and his value to the command was limited only by his time aboard. (AX B at 5-
6.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that he found that his new ship was severely undermanned, with 
the radio shack at half-manning. Although the leading petty officer (LPO) position called 
for a chief petty officer (E-7), the LPO was another IT1. (Tr. 58.) Applicant was assigned 
as the information assurance manager from November 2014 to July 2015. He was 
formally counseled on six occasions in April, May, and June 2015 for the following 
instances of substandard performance of duty:   
 
 April 17, 2015: failed a spot check because he failed to complete a maintenance 
requirement card (MRC)2 as required and failed to take appropriate action as work center 
supervisor when subordinates reported maintenance issues. (GX 4 at 1.) 
 
 May 12, 2015: failed to perform a spot check during his watch as directed by his 
work center supervisor. (GX 4 at 2.) 
 
 May 17, 2015: sent inaccurate access information to shore-based units, causing 
the ship to lose connectivity. (GX 4 at 3.) 
 
 June 16, 2015: failed to perform a maintenance check properly. (GX 4 at 4.) 
 
 June 19, 2015: failed to inform chain of command about reconfiguration of 
classified offsite backup, causing the backup system to be erased. (GX 4 at 5.) 
 
 June 26, 2015: failure to notify chain of command and obtain permission to conduct 
maintenance affecting ship-wide operations, causing a two-day delay in troubleshooting 
during an operationally demanding underway. 
 
 Applicant testified that the counseling was from a first class petty officer, a second 
class petty officer, and his division officer. (Tr. 58-59.) The counselors’ names on the 
counseling sheets are illegible, and the position of the counselor is not listed. 
 
On July 15, 2015, Applicant received non-judicial punishment (NJP) for dereliction 
of duty when he “negligently failed to follow procedural compliance to wit: Did not utilize 
an MRC while conducting 3M preventative maintenance IAW NAVSEAINST 4790.8C 
SEC 2-4.6.” There were two aspects to this allegation: (1) that he failed to obtain 
permission from the work center supervisor before rebooting an unclassified server; and 
(2) that he did not use the MRC in the work center, but instead relied on his personal copy 
of the MRC. His actions caused the server to be out of service for several hours. He was 
reduced in rate to IT2. (GX 3.) He appealed his punishment, and his appeal was denied. 
His reduction required that he be discharged under the Navy high-tenure rules. His 
security clearance was suspended while he was aboard the ship, but it was not revoked. 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had asked for and received permission 
from the work center supervisor to reboot. (Tr. 55.) When the work center supervisor was 
                                                          
2 An MRC lists the steps and tools need for various kinds of preventive maintenance. Classification of the 
MRC depends on the equipment to which it applies. (Tr. 57.) 
 
4 
 
interviewed by Applicant’s LPO, he denied giving Applicant permission to reboot. The 
investigative file on which the NJP was based included written statements from Applicant 
and the LPO, but none from the work center supervisor. The investigation into the incident 
revealed that Applicant made a personal copy of the MRC for systems in the work center. 
(GX 3.) His division officer regarded his unauthorized copy of the MRC to be a breach of 
cyber security. Applicant testified at the hearing that his personal copy of the MRC was 
identical to the original and was always kept in the work center, a secure area cleared for 
open use of classified material. He denied writing down passwords on his copy of the 
MRC, but admitted that he kept a personal list of passwords. (Tr. 77.)  
 
 Applicant’s last evaluation report before his discharge from the Navy, for July to 
December 2015, rated him as “meets standards” in all performance traits and rated him 
as “promotable,” with favorable comments about his drive, persistence, ingenuity, and 
attitude. (AX B at 1-2.)  
 
 When Applicant reported for duty in his first job as a civilian, he made an 
appointment with his security manager to discuss the status of his security clearance. He 
knew that his security clearance was suspended after his NJP. He was not aware of the 
incident report regarding the events leading up to his NJP until he applied for a job as a 
civilian and learned that the incident report had not been closed out. According to the 
summary of an interview with a security investigator in September 2016, he admitted that 
he did not provide the security manager with the full details about his nonjudicial 
punishment and did not disclose his record of counseling, because he did not believe he 
was required to provide more details than necessary, did not want to be viewed 
negatively, and was concerned about keeping his job. (GX 2 at 7.)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the summary of his security interview was 
accurate. He testified that he gave his security manager a copy of the record of NJP and 
copies of his performance evaluations about two weeks after he was hired. He did not 
mention the counseling chits because he did not believe that they were related to the 
suspension of his security clearance and were not mentioned in the incident report. 
Counseling chits are filed in local command files, do not become part of the official 
personnel record, and do not follow an individual from command to command. Applicant 
testified that when he received the SOR, which alleged the counseling chits, he provided 
the security manager with the information about them. According to Applicant, the security 
manager commented that she was not surprised that he had been counseled for earlier 
incidents before he received NJP. (Tr. 81-85.)   
 
The security manager submitted a statement in which she stated that Applicant 
never withheld information or attempted to mislead her about his NJP and counseling. 
She noted that Applicant’s NJP recited that he was occupying two positions, information 
assurance manager and network systems administrator, which are usually separate 
positions, and that he was given a very short time to assume those roles before being 
given NJP. In her statement, she commented, “As the Chief Security Officer for [her 
organization] for the past 15 years and a retired Navy Intelligence Chief, it feels like 
something is not right with this picture.” She has worked with Applicant for two years, with 
 
5 
 
almost daily contact, and she strongly supports continuation of his security clearance. 
(AX E.) 
 
 A long-term friend of Applicant, who served as an enlisted sailor and an officer in 
the U.S. Navy for about 17 years, has known him since 1995 and considers his honesty, 
integrity, and reliability “impeccable” and his judgment “irreproachable.” (Tr. 20-21.) A co-
worker who has worked with Applicant since December 2016 considers him honest and 
trustworthy. He regards Applicant as “very to-the-T,” making sure that everything is done 
correctly. (Tr. 38-39.) Applicant’s direct supervisor, who served in the U.S. Air Force for 
23 years, regards Applicant as truthful and honest, and his integrity “beyond reproach.” 
(Tr. 41-47.) Two former co-workers from Applicant’s overseas assignments, a senior 
member of the staff currently supported by Applicant, and two former fellow college 
students (one a retired U.S. Air Force officer) submitted letters attesting to Applicant’s 
skill, worth ethic, integrity, dedication, and positive attitude. (AX F-J.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
6 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant admitted to a security investigator in September 
2016 that he failed to disclose the complete details of his NJP and his prior counseling 
sessions for poor work performance (SOR 1.a); that he had approximately five counseling 
sessions for poor work performance (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that he received NJP in July 2015 
for dereliction of duty by failing to follow procedural guidance (SOR ¶ 1.c). The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The following potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative; 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations.  
 
The SOR does not allege what “complete details” Applicant omitted when he 
disclosed his NJP to his current security manager. The document he provided alleged 
that he failed to comply with U.S. Navy instructions. If he had provided additional details, 
he likely would have disclosed that his violation was an omission rather than a deliberate 
act and that he believed that he complied with the required procedure. He did not mention 
the allegation of creating a copy of the MRC, because he was not counseled about it, and 
it was not included in the NJP. 
 
The SOR also alleges that he failed to disclose his counseling sessions. He 
credibly testified that he believed the suspension of his clearance was due to the NJP 
and that the counseling sessions were not relevant. There is no evidence that the security 
manager asked him any questions about his performance of duty, although the security 
manager surmised that there probably were prior incidents that led up to NJP and a 
career-ending reduction in rate. When Applicant received the SOR and saw that his 
counseling sessions were alleged, he promptly and voluntarily provided the additional 
information to his security manager. It is notable that the security manager submitted a 
letter supporting continuation of Applicant’s clearance and asserted that Applicant had 
not withheld any information or attempted to mislead her. 
 
Based on the foregoing discussion, I conclude that SOR ¶ 1.a is not established 
by substantial evidence. However, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and his 
admissions are corroborated by the documentary evidence in the record. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Even if there were substantial evidence that Applicant withheld information during 
his initial meeting with his security manager, AG ¶ 17(a) would be applicable, because 
Applicant provided additional information when he learned that the SOR alleged his 
counseling sessions. 
 
 Applicant’s derelictions were not “minor,” because they seriously disrupted the 
operations of a ship underway. They were not infrequent. However, they occurred almost 
three years ago and were the product of Applicant’s inexperience in simultaneously 
holding two demanding positions with an undermanned crew. His LPO was another IT1, 
and he did not have an experienced mentor to help him learn how to do a demanding job. 
During his past two years as a civilian, he has gained a reputation as a dependable, 
responsible, trustworthy employee. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. Applicant had a stellar performance record before April 2015, when 
his performance apparently fell short of what his command expected. Within three 
months, his career abruptly ended. His current security manager concluded that 
“something is not right with this picture.” Since December 2015, he has established 
himself as a talented, dedicated, responsible, and trustworthy employee. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his personal conduct. 
 
  
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
