 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02619 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 21, 2016. On 
August 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline G. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) published in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 30, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018. On February 8, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that his hearing was scheduled 
for March 2, 2018. I conducted the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any 
documentary evidence. DOHA receipt the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 12, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a field service technician employed by a defense contractor since 
March 2016. He has been employed by the same defense contractor since October 2008. 
He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant attended a community college from October 2008 to September 2011. 
He did not receive a degree, but he received a maritime technology certificate. He has 
lived with a cohabitant, now his wife, since September 2015. (Tr. 16.) They were married 
in June 2016 and are expecting their first child. (Tr. 18.) 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was cited for public intoxication. He testified that he 
was arrested after consuming about ten drinks and then walked outside with a beer in his 
hand. He was fined $60. (Tr. 21.) 
 
 In August 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated 
(DWI). He pleaded nolo contendere, was convicted, and was sentenced to 365 days in 
jail, with 360 days suspended, and unsupervised probation for three years. His driver’s 
license was restricted for one year. (GX 2; GX 3.) He was driving home from a bar when 
he was stopped for driving the wrong way on a one-way street. At the hearing, he denied 
being on the one-way street at issue, but he admitted that his blood-alcohol content (BAC) 
was .14%. (Tr. 23-24.) 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace, 
public intoxication, and obstruction of justice. He pleaded not guilty to disturbing the peace 
and obstruction of justice. He prepaid a $25 fine for public intoxication. He was convicted 
of disturbing the peace, fined $100, and placed on unsupervised probation for 12 months. 
The charge of obstruction of justice was dismissed. (GX 4; GX 5; GX 6.) This incident 
occurred when Applicant was drinking with friends in a bar when he heard a heavily 
intoxicated man outside the bar cursing and acting belligerently toward a woman with 
whom Applicant was acquainted. Applicant went outside to tell the man to stop talking 
belligerently and profanely to the woman. The intoxicated man then cursed and moved 
aggressively toward Applicant. Applicant punched the man in the face, knocked him 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
3 
 
down, and repeatedly hit him until he was unconscious. When Applicant saw the police 
approaching, he ran away, giving rise to the charge of obstructing justice. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
 In August 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with public intoxication. He 
prepaid a $25 fine. (GX 7.) This incident occurred after Applicant and some friends left a 
club and decided to ride their bicycles to Applicant’s house. According to Applicant, a 
policeman stopped him, accused him of throwing his bicycle under a bus, and Applicant 
responded by calling the policeman a rookie. At that point, the policeman arrested 
Applicant and took him to the station. Applicant testified that he had only one drink at the 
club and was not intoxicated. (Tr. 28-29.)  
 
 In June 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with resisting arrest, 
trespassing, and public intoxication. Applicant prepaid the $25 fine for public intoxication. 
The remaining charges were dismissed. (GX 2 at 3.) Applicant had been in a bar for about 
five hours, during which time he consumed about ten drinks. He went across the street to 
a convenience store and purchased a pizza. While at the convenience store, he invited 
some young women to come back to the bar with him. A security guard, dressed in shabby 
clothing, told Applicant to leave the store. Applicant refused to leave, the police were 
called, and they arrested him. (Tr. 31-33.) 
 
 In August 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with public intoxication. He 
pleaded not guilty, and was convicted. He prepaid a $25 fine. (GX 7.) He testified that he 
rode his bicycle home after consuming about 15 drinks. He parked his bicycle in the front 
yard of his home and fell asleep on the grass. The police awakened him and arrested him 
for public intoxication. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 In August 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with drinking in a public place. 
He pleaded not guilty, but the record does not reflect the disposition of the charges. (GX 
2 at 3; GX 8.) Applicant testified that he and his wife attended a house-warming party. His 
wife left early because she was not feeling well, but Applicant stayed until he “started 
getting a little tipsy,” at around 9:30 p.m. He decided to leave, and he called an Uber. 
While waiting outside, he needed to use the bathroom, and he tried to walk into an 
adjacent house that looked like his friend’s house. The occupant of the adjacent house 
called the police. After Applicant could not get into the house, he fell asleep in the front 
yard. The police arrested him for drinking in a public place. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant attributed his alcohol problems to living in a beach community and self-
medicating because of an earlier troubled relationship with another woman before he met 
his wife. (Tr. 17.) He also believed that he was more frequently targeted by police, 
including the one he called a rookie, because they recognized him when he was among 
tourists. (Tr. 17.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he completed a two-year treatment program after the 
September 2008 incident, as a condition for being hired, and he completed the program 
“with flying colors.” However, he was unable to provide any documentation of this 
treatment. (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant testified that after his marriage, he stopped going to the bars and clubs 
in the beach area, although he still lives in the same house. He has made new friends 
through his wife, and socializes with them instead of his old drinking friends. (Tr. 52.) He 
testified that he continues to consume alcohol, and there have been incidents where he 
has been intoxicated, but no further incidents where he has had encounters with the 
police. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” 
Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents establishes the following potentially 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption 
or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 23(c): the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment 
program, has no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress in a treatment program; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment program 
along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance 
with treatment recommendations. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related incident was 
about nineteen months ago. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct 
is mitigated by the passage of time. The determination must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related incident 
occurred after he submitted his SCA, when he should have known that his conduct would 
receive careful scrutiny. Since receiving the SOR, he has been under pressure to retain 
his security clearance and his job. Nevertheless, he continues to consume alcohol, 
sometimes to the point of intoxication. I conclude that his alcohol-related incidents are not 
mitigated by the passage of time, were frequent, and did not occur under unique 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 23(b), 23(c), and 23(c) are not established. Applicant has acknowledged 
that his past alcohol consumption has been excessive, but he submitted no evidence of 
counseling, treatment, or other actions to overcome the problem. Instead, he attributed 
many of his problems to being targeted by the police. He testified that his recent marriage 
and the imminent birth of a child have caused him to change his behavior, but the record 
reflects that the two most recent incidents occurred after he began cohabitating with his 
wife, and the most recent incident occurred after they were married. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a).  After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline G, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
