1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 17-02905 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable 
to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Nat. Sec. Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
 
On October 17, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting SOR 
subparagraph 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.h, 1.v, and denying the remaining allegations. She 
 
2 
 
requested a decision based on the administrative record instead of a hearing. On 
November 2, 2017, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
Applicant did not file a response. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018.  
 
Preliminary Ruling 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g, 1.i through 1.r, and 1.t allege medical debts without identifying 
the specific names of any of the creditors. As such, these allegations are vague and 
overbroad, and do not provide adequate notice to Applicant to enable her to prepare a 
response. In light of her denial of these allegations, I resolve them in her favor. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 51-year-old married woman who has been separated from her 
husband since 2013. She has been working for a federal contractor as a mail clerk since 
June 2016. 
 
 Applicant worked as a mail carrier from 2000 to 2014. (Item 3 at 5) In December 
2013, she was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated. Her refusal to take a 
breathalyzer after the stop prompted an automatic one-year suspension of her driver’s 
license per state law. In March 2014, while the charge was pending, Applicant became ill 
and required surgery. She stopped working, using extended disability leave. (Item 3 at 2) In 
July 2014, Applicant was dismissed from her job, in part, because she was unable to drive 
the mail trucks, as her license was suspended. (Item 3 at 4) 
 
 Applicant remained unemployed for nearly two years after losing her job, before her 
current employer hired her. (Item 2 at 12) The majority of Applicant’s delinquencies, 
including her 2014 federal and state income tax delinquencies, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.x and 1.y, stemmed from her unemployment. (Item 2 at 37) 
 
 Applicant contends that she is paying her tax delinquencies through a wage 
garnishment. (Item 1 at 6) She provided no documentary evidence. Similarly, she provided 
no evidence of any efforts to arrange payment plans, establish a track record of financial 
payments, or to contact the creditors.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
3 
 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” 
and AG ¶ 19(f), “failure . . . to pay Federal, state or local income taxes, as required.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of  the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant was out of work for two years, in part, because she was recuperating from 
a surgery. However, she lost her job, primarily, because of a DUI conviction that resulted in 
the loss of her license for a year, and precluded her from working in a profession that 
periodically requires driving. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant provided no documentary evidence of actions she has taken to either 
resolve her delinquent debts or dispute the debts that she denied. Under these 
circumstances, none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the whole-person concept factors in my analysis of the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions and it does not warrant a favorable conclusion. I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
5 
 
Subparagraphs 1.i - 1.r:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.s:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph t:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.u – 1.y:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
