 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02655 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
   For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).1 In a letter dated November 14, 2017, Applicant answered the allegations 
and requested a determination based on the written record. On February 9, 2018, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). 
The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018.  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, revisions have been made 
to the AG for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. The revised AG are applied here and are 
available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
As part of the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). The 
request is included with the FORM as Item 5. Applicant did not object to its admission. I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts considered 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by its Communist Party. It 
has a poor human rights record. China suppresses political dissent, engages in arbitrary 
arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.  
 
China is the world’s most active and persistent perpetrator of economic 
espionage. It is among the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology, as well as military and economic intelligence. China targets the United 
States with active intelligence-gathering programs, both legal and illegal. Its focus is on 
obtaining information and technologies from the United States that could be beneficial to 
China’s military modernization and economic development. China’s intelligence 
services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit 
Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider access at 
work to steal trade secrets, often using removable media devices or e-mail. Recent 
cases involving actual or attempted espionage by China against the United States, as 
well as incidents involving the illegal export of sensitive technology to China, exist.  
 
In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone conversations, facsimile 
transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communications. Authorities open 
and censor mail. Its security services have entered personal residences and offices to 
gain access to computers, telephones and fax machines. Hotel guest rooms are 
sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old who works with a defense contractor as an engineer, 
where he has been employed since about April 2015. He accepted this job upon 
graduation from college with a bachelor’s degree. Applicant is currently taking some on-
line graduate-level courses. Applicant is single, does not own a vehicle and has no 
problems meeting his financial obligations.  
 
 Born in China, Applicant came to this country with his mother in 2002, when he 
was 11 years old. He was told by his mother that his United States citizenship is derived 
from when she became a naturalized United States citizen in 2008, when U.S. law 
allowed minor children of immigrants to become U.S. citizens when the parents became 
citizens. The Chinese passport issued to Applicant in 2002, which he used to come to 
this country, has since expired.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Since April 2016, Applicant has lived in a “spouse-like relationship” with a former 
college roommate, although he does not know this person’s date of birth or middle 
name. (FOR, Item 4, at 4) In that same year, his mother remarried. Applicant’s 
stepfather is a United States citizen by birth and a former member of the U.S. military. 
(SOR Answer)  
 
 Applicant’s birth father is a citizen and resident of China, where he is a member 
of the Communist Party of China (CPC). Applicant visited his father in China from June 
or July 2011 through September 2011, and from December 2015 through January 2016. 
Applicant’s father does not talk to Applicant about his experiences in the CPC, but 
Applicant suspects his father joined the party at a young age. Applicant’s father 
presently works in a non-governmental sales position.   
 
Applicant and his father trade messages via an Internet chat application about 
every two months. His father is aware that he is seeking a national security position in 
the United States. (FORM, Item 4, at 5) Since his parent’s divorce when he was young, 
Applicant has not considered himself to be close to his father. He was raised largely 
without his father in his life, despite the protracted 2011 visit and the briefer, more 
recent visit from December 2015 to January 2016. Today, Applicant considers himself 
to be independent and not reliant on his parents. (FORM, Item 4, at 5)   
 
Applicant has a stepmother who is a citizen and resident of China. He does not 
know her name. He “only met her one time, when he stayed with his father in China” in 
2011. (FORM, Item 4, at 5) At that time, she was referred to as “auntie.” During his trip 
to China between December 2015 and January 2016, he learned she had since married 
his father. Applicant knows little else about her.  
 
In China, Applicant also has his paternal grandparents, who are citizens and 
residents of China. Both are almost 90 years old and have been retired for over two 
decades. Applicant last had contact with his grandmother in January 2017 via the 
Internet chat application. Applicant does not think she knows he is applying for a 
national security position, and he does not know if she has any ties to the Chinese 
government. Applicant’s grandfather is retired from a government job and Applicant 
assumes his grandfather is a member of the CPC. Applicant “could not speculate or 
provide a specific frequency of contact” he has with his grandfather, but he does 
communicate with him “in generalities” when someone who lives in China “sends a 
[Internet application] text message to the family-group text.” (FORM, Item 4, at 6) 
 
In addition, Applicant has multiple extended family members who are citizens 
and residents of China. Like the relatives noted above, all were born in China. They are 
individuals with whom he may have some exchange through the above-referenced 
Internet-based chat and text application. These include three aunts, two uncles, and five 
cousins, who also use the family-group Internet application. (FORM, Item 4, at 7) 
Applicant has no other relations or friends who are citizens and residents of China.2 
                                                          
2 Applicant does have an maternal grandmother who is a citizen of China, but she has resided with 
Applicant’s mother in the United States since January 2017. She is retired. She knows little about 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All reliable information about the 
person must be considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An a applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision is on an applicant.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard protected information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Interests  
 
 Under the AG, foreign contact and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U. S. interests or 
otherwise be made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant and he knows little about her and her affiliations. (FORM, Item 4, at 6-7) Applicant sees her on 
the weekends he visits his mother. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Assessment of foreign contact and interests should consider the country (China) in 
which the foreign contact or interest is included.  
 
 The AG lists nine available disqualifying conditions. Given that Applicant has 
multiple members of his family who are foreign nationals living in China, I find the 
following apply:  
 
¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country, if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and  
 
¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
Under ¶ 8, two mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
  
¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 As a threshold issue, I note that China has an authoritarian government 
dominated by its Communist Party. It is the world’s most active and aggressive 
perpetrator of economic espionage, particularly with regard to its pursuit of sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology and both U.S. military and economic intelligence. Indeed, it is 
known to specifically target the U.S. with its intelligence-gathering programs. Both its 
government and private entities within its borders are known to exploit Chinese citizens 
and those with family ties to China in order to gain access to trade secrets and other 
protected information of U.S. origin. China is known to monitor various forms of 
communication, including the Internet. Consequently, heightened scrutiny is warranted 
in this matter.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Although Applicant stresses that he is not close to his father in China, Applicant 
visited his father in China for multiple months in 2011, and, more recently, for at least a 
few weeks during the winter of 2015-2016, shortly after Applicant started working for the 
defense contractor now supporting him for a security clearance. Moreover, the two 
regularly exchange salutations and news about every other month via the Internet. Such 
contact and communication has led to the father sharing with his son that he is a current 
member of the CPC, and resulted in the Applicant informing his father that he is seeking 
a national security position in the United States. The frequency of contact and the 
exchange of such information, intentionally or unintentionally, indicates that they share 
more than civil pleasantries. Meanwhile, albeit of less concern, little is known of 
Applicant’s stepmother, her past, or her nexus with the Chinese government, if any.  
 
 Information regarding Applicant’s paternal grandparents is scant, but Applicant 
admits they maintain some degree of contact via Internet and during his trips to China. 
Applicant believes his grandfather is a member of the CPC. Moreover, some degree of 
concern is raised by the fact that the grandfather may be dependent on the Chinese 
government in terms of a retirement pension or other form of public assistance. With 
regard to other relatives in China, insufficient information was provided to assess those 
individuals properly.  
 
 Applicant’s continued communication and visits with his paternal relations in 
China reflect more than a perfunctory sense of loyalty to, at the very least, his father. 
This is true despite Applicant’s 16 years in this country with his mother. Given the 
country at issue; China’s known interests in, and methods of, targeting U.S. intelligence; 
and the activities and associations of, in particular, both Applicant’s father and paternal 
grandfather, both Applicant and those kin could be made targets of Chinese interests. 
Consequently, I find neither ¶ 8(a) nor ¶ 8 (b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under the AG, the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. That analysis includes the fact that 
Applicant was born in China, then immigrated to the United States with is mother in 
2002, when he was 11 years old. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008.  
 
Now 27 years old, Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor since 
April 2015. He is financially independent, has earned a bachelor’s degree, and is 
 
 
 
 
7 
pursuing graduate studies. Applicant cohabitates with a partner and remains close to his 
mother, who has since remarried.   
  
Remaining behind in China, however, are Applicant’s father, stepmother, 
paternal grandparents, and other relations. While Applicant’s stepmother is a virtual 
stranger, Applicant maintains a relationship with his father. They communicate regularly, 
about every two months, through an Internet application, a mode of communication that 
has been known to be monitored by the Chinese government. It also appears that this 
application may feature a “family-group” function, where others can read what has been 
posted between communicants, leaving open the possibility that communications are 
not necessarily private even within Applicant’s family.   
  
 Moreover, Applicant visited his father for several months in 2011, and between 
December 2015 and January 2016, after Applicant began working for his present 
defense contractor employer. Apparently, their personal conversations and Internet 
communications go beyond mere pleasantries: Applicant knows his father is an active 
member of the CPC, and his father knows he is applying for national security position.  
 
Applicant also maintains some degree of communication with his paternal 
grandparents. Of interest there is the fact Applicant’s grandfather is retired from 
government service and may be dependent to some degree on a government pension 
or some other form of government aid. As to his other foreign kin, the scant information 
provided limits the heightened level of inquiry needed here. Such vulnerabilities raise 
genuine concerns when the country at issue is China, given its record with regard to 
human rights, economic espionage, and efforts designed to cull protected information 
from the United States.    
 
There is no question here as to Applicant’s loyalty to the United States or his 
professionalism within his field. Genuine security concerns regarding foreign influence, 
however, remain unmitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
