 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-014281 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations’ trustworthiness concerns. 
National security eligibility for a position of public trust is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On May 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on 
June 2, 2017, and requested a hearing (Answer).   
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
January 11, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 12, 2018, setting the 
hearing for January 31, 2018. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A, and 1 through 10 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections, 
                                            
1 This case was mislabeled as ADP Case No. 17-01248. 
 
 
 
 
2 
except GE 2.2 After Applicant made non-material corrections to GE 2, it was admitted 
without further objections. (Tr. 10-13) DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 7, 2018. The record remained open until February 28, 2018, for the submission 
of additional exhibits. Applicant timely submitted AE 11 through 15, which I admited 
without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and has been married for 20 years. He and his wife have 
three children. Applicant has earned about three and a half-years of college credit. He 
began working for his current employer in November 2015. He is a senior lead in the 
healthcare division. Prior to this position, he worked for another employer for 11 years. 
(Tr. 20) 
  
 Applicant attributed his financial problems and delinquent debts to four factors: In 
2004, he moved to his present state to care for his sick mother. In 2007, he lost his 
medical insurance because he could no longer afford the premium. In 2008, his mother 
died, leaving him debts and expenses related to her care. In 2009, his daughter was 
diagnosed with a spinal condition that required trips to a medical center in another state, 
and caused him to incur numerous costs.3 All of these factors created additional expenses 
and affected his ability to pay routine obligations. (Tr. 24-27) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2018, March 2017, and 
December 2015, the SOR alleged 16 debts that became delinquent between 2009 and 
2015, and totaled $16,983. Of those, one is an automobile repossession; four are 
judgments; ten are medical debts; and one debt is owed to a cable company. (GE 3, GE 
4, GE 6) The status of each debt is as follows:  
 
 The $7,147 delinquent debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a is owed to a creditor for an 
automobile that was repossessed in 2015. Applicant stopped making payments on the 
debt after his wife was injured at work in 2013 and their income decreased. He intends to 
pay the debt when he has sufficient money. (Tr. 31-33)  
  
 The $2,894 judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.b was owed to an apartment complex 
where Applicant lived. He withheld the last month’s rent after he and the company became 
engaged in a dispute about the condition of the apartment. The company later sued 
Applicant and the debt was paid through a garnishment. The debt was satisfied in May 
2016. (Tr. 34- 35; AE 8) 
  
 The $1,687 judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.c was owed to a credit card company. 
Applicant stopped making payments on the account when his daughter began having 
                                            
2 GE 2 is an Enhanced Subject Interview, dated July 28, 2016. 
 
3 Applicant’s daughter’s was insured through a state insurance policy. That policy covered many medical 
bills, but not all expenses. 
 
 
 
 
3 
medical issues. A judgment was entered in May 2010 and it was paid through a 
garnishment in August 2010. (Tr. 35-36; AE 9) 
 
 The $303 judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.d was owed for a medical debt. The judgment 
was paid through a garnishment and released in January 2018. (Tr. 36-37; AE 7, AE 15) 
 
 The $3,111 judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.e was owed to an apartment complex. The 
judgment was paid through a garnishment and released in January 2018. (Tr. 37-38; AE 
16) 
 
 The $236 bill owed to a cable company listed in SOR ¶ 1.f is resolved. Applicant 
testified that he disputed the debt and it was removed from his CBR. He said the company 
had billed him at two addresses. He submitted a recent bill indicating that his account is 
current. (Tr. 39; AE 14) 
 
 Applicant disputed the 10 medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g through 1.p with a 
credit bureau in late 2016 or early 2017. These debts totaled $1,600 and related to his 
daughter’s care. He never received a response to the disputes. He believes the debts 
were paid by the state’s insurance company, which covered his daughter’s care. Applicant 
emphasized that the medical debts were not old enough to be have been removed from 
his CBR, but were instead resolved. (AE 11) His March 2017 CBR does not contain any 
of the medical debts, except the $110 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which was later paid. 
(AE 6) The January 2018 CBR does not reference any of these debts. Neither CBR 
contain new debts. (Tr. 40; GE 3, GE 6; AE 10) Applicant submitted a printout from his 
medical provider account that shows all medical bills from August 2016 through July 2017, 
were paid as of August 2017. (AE 6) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net monthly income is $5,087 and his expenses 
are about $5,407, leaving a shortage some months. Included in his expenses is a $250 
payment to a friend, who loaned him $2,800 in late 2015. The balance on that loan is 
$1,300. He does not owe taxes to the Federal government or state. He has not 
participated in credit counseling. (Tr. 28-31; AE 1)  
 
 Applicant’s 2016 annual performance review rated him as an outstanding 
contributor. His manager noted that he exceeded expectations in his 2017 
recommendation for a promotion for Applicant. (AE 4, AE 5) 
 
Policies 
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective within the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
 
5 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. Three may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b)  unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2010 and 2015, which he was 
financially unable or unwilling to timely resolve until recently. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. Five may be potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
 
 
 
6 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The 16 SOR-alleged debts accumulated between 2009 and 2015. Applicant’s most 
recent credit report, January 2018, does not list any new debts subsequent to 2015, 
indicating that in the past three years, he has not accumulated additional delinquent 
accounts. All but one of those debts has been resolved. The evidence establishes some 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), as the circumstances that contributed to his financial 
delinquencies are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current trustworthiness. 
 
Four unforeseeable circumstances contributed to Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies: caring for his mother and her subsequent death; unanticipated expenses 
related to his daughter’s illness; his wife’s injury, resulting in a decrease in her income; 
and the loss of his medical insurance. Applicant did not provide information that he 
attempted to responsibly manage his debts until after they had been delinquent for a time, 
which information is required to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling; however, there are 
indications that his financial delinquencies are coming under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies. The four judgments listed in the SOR were resolved through garnishments, which 
does not represent a good-faith effort to resolve one’s debts. AG ¶ 20(d) minimally 
applies. Although not alleged, Applicant has been making monthly payments on the 
balance of a loan he owes a friend, which demonstrates some good-faith effort toward 
that debt.  
 
Applicant disputed 11 delinquent debts with a credit bureau: 1 cable bill and 10 
medical bills. None of those were listed on his May 2017 or January 2018 CBRs. Applicant 
explained his reasons for disputing the debts, and there is some evidence from which to 
conclude that he was successful in his disputes. The evidence establishes some 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
7 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose during a five-year period of time, as a 
consequence of factors that were outside of his control. His 2017 and 2018 CBRs do not 
list new debts since 2015. At this time, he has established a record of resolving debts, 
and sufficiently mitigated the SOR allegations. After observing his demeanor and listening 
to his testimony, I found Applicant to be honest and committed to responsibly managing 
his financial obligations. I have no doubts that he will resolve the remaining delinquent 
debt owed for the automobile repossession. Overall, the evidence does not raise doubts 
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a position of trust.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:      For Applicant 
        
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a position of public 
trust. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
