 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01556 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Andrew Bakaj, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns raised, but he did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns relating to student loans. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On 
June 27, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. 
 
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
August 16, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 12, 2017, setting the 
hearing for January 10, 2018. On that date, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 into evidence. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through E into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2018. The record 
 
 
 
 
2 
remained open until February 12, 2018, to permit submission of additional evidence and 
Applicant’s closing argument. Applicant timely submitted AE F through L without an 
objection from Department Counsel. Those exhibits are admitted. Applicant’s attorney 
also submitted a Closing Argument (Enclosure 1) and a Certificate of Service (Enclosure 
2). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and married for 36 years. He and his wife have four adult 
children. Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 1993. He earned a bachelor’s degree 
in 2006, a master’s degree in 2009, and a certificate in communications in 2011. He has 
held a security clearance since 2005, and has had access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI) with a national law enforcement agency since 2016. He started his 
current position in November 2015. Prior to this job, he has worked for other federal 
contractors since 2003. He experienced short periods of unemployment between 
contracts. (Tr. 40-41; GE 1; AE A)    
 
 When Applicant completed Section 26 in his March 2016 security clearance 
application (SCA), which requested information about delinquent debts or accounts, 
Applicant failed to disclose his delinquent or unpaid student loans. He had taken out those 
loans to pay for the cost of his bachelor’s degree in 2006, a master’s degree in 2009, and 
a certificate program that he completed in 2011. (Tr. 44, 89; GE 1)  
 
 In November 2016, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator about 
information in his SCA. During the interview, Applicant discussed the status of his unpaid 
government and private student loans. He indicated that he was attempting to consolidate 
and pay them. He believed some loans were in deferment. (GE 3)  
 
 During his testimony, Applicant reiterated that he thought his loans were deferred 
when he submitted the SCA. (Tr. 44-45, 55) He was unaware that his government student 
loans were past due, until late May or early June 2017, when he heard from the creditor. 
He learned the private loans were due in early May or June 2016, and said that he began 
making payments on those loans in November 2016. (Tr. 47-49, 77) He denied that he 
intentionally failed to disclose the delinquent student loans on his SCA. (Tr. 55) He also 
assumed that the Government had knowledge of his student loans, and he emphasized 
that he was not trying “to pull a fast one.” (Tr. 95)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from May 2016 and December 2017, the 
SOR alleged 15 government student loans that became delinquent in June 2014, and 3 
private student loans that were unpaid in April 2016. The alleged student loans totaled 
over $196,000. (GE 7, GE 8) As of June 2017, the balance on the government loans was 
$182,463.1 (AE C) As of October 2016, the balance on the private loans was $93,885, 
                                            
1 According to a December 2017 statement from the government student loan program, the balance was 
$185,856 as of that date. (AE G) 
 
 
 
 
3 
which included about $50,000 of educational loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q) that Applicant 
co-signed for his son.2 (Tr. 47, 72; AE C, AE D, AE J)  
 
 After completing his certificate course in 2011, Applicant did not begin making 
payments on any of the student loans. He said he was laid off between April and May 
2011, and then moved to another state for a job and remained there for a year. He stated 
that he put the loans in a deferred status at that time. He returned home in March 2012 
and was again without a job for a month. From May 2012 until June 2015, he lived and 
worked in a different state. In June 2015, he returned home and began his current position 
in November 2015. (Tr. 64-66) He asserted that he was unable to pay the student loans 
prior to taking his current position because he lacked sufficient money, as a consequence 
of maintaining two households during the years he worked in other states, and 
experiencing periods of unemployment. (Tr. 64-67)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that from the time he began a bachelor’s degree in May 
2005 until November 2016, he did not make payments on any loan. After being contacted 
by the private loan company in April 2016, he said he started making monthly payments 
of $500 on the private loans, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.p through 1.r, in November 2016. He 
began repaying the government student loans, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.o, in June 
2017, through monthly payments of about $500. He thinks it will take him 10 to 12 years 
to pay the loans. (Tr. 91-92; GE 1)  
 
 Applicant said he kept the loans in a deferred status or believed they were deferred 
until 2016. (Tr. 89- 91) He had periodic contact with the creditors, sometimes every six 
months, but continued to think that the loans were deferred, although he did not remember 
the last time he actively requested a deferment. (Tr. 67, 71) As of this hearing, he has 
been making payments on both loans and they are in a current status. (Tr. 43, 53-54, 89-
91; AE C, AE D, AE F, AE G) 
 
 Applicant submitted a financial statement. He noted that he owes about $220,000 
for student loans.3 (AE E) His current annual salary is $125,000. (Tr. 59) He does not 
have a written budget. (Tr. 93-94) After the hearing, he contacted a credit counseling 
company for financial counseling. (AE K) He filed all federal and state tax returns for the 
past eight years. He does not owe any outstanding taxes. His federal tax refunds for 2015 
and 2016 were seized by the government and applied to his government student loans. 
The refunds totaled about $3,000. After learning of the seizures, he did not investigate 
the reason for them, but thought the Government took the money because his loans were 
deferred. (Tr. 60-62)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he “put his head in the sand” about his loans for many 
years, and essentially ignored them because he could not afford to pay them. (Tr. 68) He 
                                            
2 According to January 2018 statements from the two private student loan programs, the combined balance 
was $92,139 as of that date. (AE F) 
 
3 During his testimony, Applicant acknowledged that based on the statements in evidence, he owed 
$276,000 in student loans. (Tr. 81, 91) 
 
 
 
 
4 
never thought about obtaining a credit report during this investigation to confirm the 
deferment status of his loans. (Tr. 70-71) He acknowledged that during a previous 
security clearance investigation in 2010 he discussed his financial status, which included 
delinquent debts.4 (Tr. 69; GE 4) 
 
 Applicant called three witnesses. His wife learned of the student loan problems 
around Christmas time in 2016. Applicant manages their finances and she is responsible 
for other aspects of the household. She strongly supports her husband. She co-signed 
for another son’s educational loans. Those loans total between $40,000 and $60,000. (Tr. 
30-36, 87-88)  
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor testified. He has been Applicant’s supervisor since 
November 2017. He said Applicant is an outstanding, reliable and honest employee. He 
recommends him for a security clearance. (Tr. 16-24) Applicant’s manager testified. She 
too recommends him for a security clearance and believes he possesses good judgment 
and is trustworthy. (Tr. 24-29)  
   
Policies 
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) that became effective on June 
8, 2017. 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
                                            
4 The SOR did not allege facts related to Applicant’s 2010 financial problems as a security concern. That 
adverse fact will not be analyzed as a potential disqualifying condition, but may be considered under the 
analyses of mitigating conditions and the whole-person concept, and the evaluation of Applicant’s 
credibility. 
 
 
 
 
5 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Three may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been unable or unwilling to address his large number of unpaid 
student loans that began accumulating in 2006 and remained that way until late 2016. 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. The following four may 
potentially apply:  
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant owes a significant amount of money for unpaid 
student loans. That problem has been ongoing since at least 2014 when his government 
loans became delinquent. His failure to timely address the loans casts doubt on his 
judgment. Some of Applicant’s financial problems arose because he maintained two 
households while working in different states in order to support his family. That may have 
been a circumstance beyond his control. However, his decision to continue obtaining 
student loans for his advanced education and his son’s education, was within his control. 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant attempted to responsibly manage his student 
loan debts as they were accumulating or after they became due. There is minimal 
evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant did not provide evidence that 
he participated in credit or financial counseling and that his significantly large student loan 
debt is under control, as required under AG ¶ 20(c). Although he recently established 
 
 
 
 
7 
payment plans for the loans during this security clearance investigation, those actions do 
not constitute a good-faith effort to repay his loans, given his years of indifference and 
failure to address them prior to 2016. The evidence does not establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose his delinquent or unpaid student 
loans in his March 2016 SCA, but denied that he intentionally misled the Government as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this 
case, the Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether 
there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the 
time the omission occurred.5 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) 
(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not intentionally attempt to deceive the 
Government by failing to disclose student loan debt in his SCA was sufficiently credible. 
He stated that he was unaware at that time that the debts were no longer in deferment, 
and he believed the Government would have known of them. He proffered this 
explanation during an investigative interview in 2016 and in his hearing. After listening to 
Applicant testify and observing his demeanor, I find his explanation for failing to disclose 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
specific information as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a demonstrated negligence, given his previous 
financial problems, but that he did not intentionally attempt to falsify his 2016 SCA. 
Applicant successfully refuted the personal conduct security concern. SOR ¶ 2.a is found 
in his favor and a discussion of the applicability of mitigating conditions is not pertinent.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including those mentioned in the 
analysis of the financial considerations guideline. Applicant has successfully worked for 
his employer since November 2015. He accepts responsibility for his student loans and 
is remorseful over his large unresolved student debt. Those are positive factors in this 
case. However, his $220,000 student loan debt accumulated between 2006 and 2011. 
He recently began to address it, essentially after he submitted his SCA and received the 
SOR. At this time, he has not established a solid record of responsibly resolving his 
student loans or managing his finances. Overall, he has not met his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. He 
successfully refuted the security concerns raised under personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:        Against Applicant 
 
   
 
 
 
 
9 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
       Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
