
 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing for November 13, 2017. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. 
Applicant testified and submitted 12 documents, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through L, without objection. Department Counsel submitted five documents, 
which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection. After the 
hearing, Applicant timely submitted two emails with two sets of attachments, which I 
admitted as AE M through P. DOHA received the transcript on November 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns, based on Applicant’s 
14 delinquent debts, and personal conduct security concerns, based upon Applicant’s 
outside employment and debarment from U.S. Government contracting. In his response 
to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k., and he admitted the remaining 
alleged debts. He also denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a., and he admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 2.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 65 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1976. From 1974 to 
November 2013, he was employed full time as an engineer for the Department of the 
Navy (DON). He retired in November 2013 following allegations that he committed a 
procurement integrity violation. Applicant was unemployed from November 2013 to 
January 2014. Since January 2014, he has been employed full time as an engineer by a 
DOD contractor. From August 2006 to September 2013, Applicant was also self-
employed as a consultant providing engineering services to DOD contractors on subject 
matter identical to his DON duties. He has been married since 1976, and they have two 
adult children.2 
 
 Applicant’s December 2014 and February 2017 credit reports establish the 14 
debts, totaling approximately $110,000. These debts became delinquent between June 
2011 and October 2014. Applicant claimed to have been making monthly payments on 
SOR ¶ 1.c. since February 2014; however, he only provided documentary evidence of 
three payments totaling $300. There is no documentary evidence of any other payments 
or payment arrangements on Applicant’s non-mortgage debts.3 
 
 Beginning in about November 2011, Applicant struggled to afford the payments on 
his first and second mortgage-loan accounts. In 2012, Applicant consulted a real estate 
attorney, who recommended a short sale; however, Applicant chose to retain the home 
in hopes that the housing market would improve. Following a 2013 mortgage modification, 
Applicant’s mortgage payments increased significantly. From November 2014 until 
January 2017, Applicant made no mortgage payments. In 2014 and 2015, Applicant 
consulted a financial counselor and a bankruptcy attorney, who recommended 
bankruptcy. In January 2017, Applicant’s mortgage again was modified. Applicant 
claimed to have made monthly payments on his second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a.) for 18 
months; however, the documentary evidence shows that he had been denied a 
                                                          
2 GE 1; GE 5. 
 
3 GE 2; GE 3. 
 
3 
 
modification in October 2016. Applicant provided documentary evidence of January 2017 
modifications of his first and second mortgages and one payment on his second 
mortgage. There is no documentary evidence demonstrating his adherence to the 
modification agreements.4  
 
 As a DON engineer, Applicant frequently was assigned to generate a statement of 
work (SOW) for a specific project. During Applicant’s career, his projects had exclusively 
been completed or constructed by the DON itself and not developed for solicitation and 
procurement. In 2012, Applicant was assigned a typical SOW. After the SOW was 
completed, Applicant was requested to identify about ten DOD contractors capable of 
completing the specific construction project. Applicant provided a list of DOD contractors, 
including two contractors for whom he had previously provided consulting services. 
Although he recused himself from the solicitation portion of the procurement, Applicant 
did not disclose to his supervisors or coworkers that he had previously worked with any 
of the listed contractors. Applicant’s supervisor subsequently received a complaint from 
an unsuccessful bidder claiming Applicant’s conflict of interest violated procurement 
integrity regulations. The complaint triggered an investigation, and Applicant retired from 
the DON prior to the conclusion of the investigation.5  
 
 The DON investigation found that (1) Applicant was listed as a director of the DOD 
contractor who was a prospective bidder; (2) Applicant’s had performed consulting 
services ($35,000) for the DOD contractor in 2010 and in 2012, with possible overlap with 
his work on the SOW in question; (3) Applicant was listed as a representative of the DOD 
contractor for a speaking engagement at an upcoming professional conference; and (4) 
Applicant had not adhered to proper DON procedures to report his outside employment. 
In October 2014, the DON concluded that Applicant was in an employment- or business-
relationship with the DOD contractor at the time he worked on the SOW in question. He 
violated the Procurement Integrity Act, 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101 et seq., by participating 
“personally and substantially” in the procurement and solicitation. Applicant was debarred 
from U.S. Government contracting for one year, including the solicitation of professional 
services to U.S. Government agencies. Applicant completed several business ethics 
trainings to shorten his debarment.6  
 
 During his debarment, Applicant sent an email to a former DON colleague who 
was still involved with the project related to Applicant’s debarment. In addition to 
exchanging pleasantries, Applicant notified his former colleague of his new employment 
with a DOD contractor and offered his professional assistance. In March 2015, the DON 
issued a show cause letter based on this improper contact. In April 2015, the DON found 
that Applicant’s email contact with his former colleague violated his debarment, but found 
that Applicant’s contact was not intended to solicit business.7 
                                                          
4 AE A-D, N; Tr. 38-42. 
 
5 Tr. 44-59, 95-98, 103-105. 
 
6 GE 4; AE I; AE P. 
 
7 GE 4; Tr. 113-15; AE F-K, P. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant testified that he had informed his then-supervisor in 2006 about his 
outside consulting work. He further testified that he was not required to submit a financial 
disclosure form or disclose for whom he had performed consulting services. Applicant 
was aware of his listed affiliation as a director of one DOD contractor, and he was 
scheduled to speak at a professional conference as a representative of that DOD 
contractor.8  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems and delinquent debts to the confluence 
of several events. In about 2010, Applicant’s spouse closed her real estate business 
following a business downturn. In 2011, Applicant’s consulting business slowed and his 
spouse was again unemployed. In 2012, Applicant’s son was in a serious car accident, 
triggering significant medical expenses. In 2013 and 2014, Applicant’s spouse 
experienced medical problems. Applicant has financially supported his son since the 2012 
car accident, and he has financially supported his mother-in-law since about 2015. He 
currently contributes approximately $2,100 monthly towards their support.9  
 
 Applicant’s wife is currently employed, and Applicant’s income includes his salary 
from the DOD contractor and his DON retirement. Together, their monthly household 
take-home income is approximately $12,000.10 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 95-100. 
 
9 Tr. 63-88. 
 
10 Tr. 58. 86. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the S`OR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s 14 delinquent debts total approximately $110,000. These debts 
became delinquent between June 2011 and October 2014, and they remain delinquent. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
6 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant bears the burdens of production and persuasion in mitigation. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts remain, and he has not yet addressed most of these debts. Although he 
faced some circumstances that hindered his ability to address his debts, those 
circumstances abated in about 2015 with his spouse’s employment and his son’s 
recovery and employment. Applicant has not provided documentary evidence of sufficient 
debt-resolution efforts to remove doubts as to his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
Several events and circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his 
financial problems. Nonetheless, Applicant must also demonstrate that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances to address his delinquent debts. Despite not paying 
his mortgage for over two years, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution 
efforts on his non-mortgage debts until after the issuance of the SOR. Furthermore, given 
Applicant’s significant household monthly income ($12,000), only a few of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts have been addressed. Applicant has not presented sufficient 
documentary evidence for me to conclude that he acted responsibly with respect to his 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant sought professional advice from a financial counselor and multiple 
attorneys, although he did not pursue the recommendations to complete a short sale or 
bankruptcy. He has not provided a monthly budget, and most of the alleged debts remain 
unaddressed. Therefore, I cannot conclude that his financial problems are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. 
 
7 
 
Applicant provided documentary evidence of three payments on one debt (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
and one payment on his mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.a.). Although he testified that he paid 
his second mortgage loan for 18 months, Applicant’s testimony conflicts with his own 
documentary evidence. Applicant has not provided documentary evidence demonstrating 
adherence to any payment plans on the established debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant encountered circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his 
financial problems. Nonetheless, he has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly in 
addressing his delinquent debts. Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations. 
 
Applicant performed engineering services for DOD contractors in subject areas 
identical to his DON employment. His consulting work with one DOD contractor 
overlapped with his SOW assignment wherein he listed this contractor as a prospective 
bidder capable of completing the assigned project. While Applicant may not have been 
required to complete a financial disclosure statement, he was required to disclose his 
outside employment to his supervisor. There is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
informed his supervisor of his outside employment, and the DON findings concluded that 
no such report occurred. Furthermore, the DON concluded that Applicant violated the 
Procurement Integrity Act by his active participation in the solicitation while also in an 
employment relationship with the DOD contractor. Applicant then violated the debarment 
by contacting his former colleagues and offering his professional assistance. Even if 
Applicant’s violations were not deliberate, his conduct reflects a series of poor judgment 
and a failure to comply with ethics regulations. AG ¶ 16(d)(3) applies. 
 
 
8 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or such much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
Applicant’s procurement violation during his 40-year DON career was isolated, and 
there is no record evidence of other workplace violations. Applicant has acknowledged 
his mistakes and completed substantial remedial ethics training. Given his retirement and 
ethics training, these circumstances are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability and judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) apply. 
 
Applicant exercised poor judgment by failing to adequately disclose his outside 
employment with a DOD contractor and by then substantially participating in the 
procurement. He has acknowledged his behavior and completed substantial ethics 
training such that his missteps are unlikely to recur. I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
9 
 
Through extensive remedial ethics training, Applicant has mitigated the personal 
conduct security concerns associated with his poor judgment and procurement violations 
associated with his outside employment. Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control 
contributed to his financial problems; however, he failed to demonstrate that he acted 
responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. Given his burden to demonstrate financial 
responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.n.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
