 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 17-01589  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Dam, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
drug involvement and substance misuse, relating to his illegal use of a prescription drug 
and marijuana. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
On July 19, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse). Applicant 
responded to the SOR on August 17, 2017, and requested his case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On September 13, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on that day, and received by him on September 21, 2017. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM or object to Items 1 through 5. Hence, all Items are admitted 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
into evidence. On December 18, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted the four SOR allegations contained in Paragraph 1. (Item 2) His 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old, a high school graduate, and unmarried. He has worked 
for a defense contractor since November 2009 and held a security clearance during this 
time. (Item 1)  
 
 On September 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). In it he disclosed the following information: that from February 2011 to May 2015 he 
illegally used and purchased the prescription medication oxycodone, a narcotic, which 
was initially prescribed to him for pain management; and that he illegally used the drug 
while holding a security clearance. (GE 2)  
 
 In spring 2015, Applicant began participating in a nine-month outpatient medical 
program for his opioid addiction and was diagnosed with opioid type dependence, 
episodic. (GE 3) He admitted that in June 2015, while participating in treatment and 
holding a security clearance, he illegally used marijuana to manage his withdrawal 
symptoms from opioids. In July 2015, he was stopped by the police, who confiscated 
oxycodone from him that he had illegally purchased to use. (GE 1, GE 3)  
 
 During a February 2017 investigative interview, Applicant stated that he no longer 
associates with friends who use drugs. He said he has not used any illegal drug since 
June 2015. He stated that he illegally purchased and used oxycodone on a weekly basis 
for several years. He does not intend to use illegal drugs or marijuana in the future. (GE 
3) No other information regarding Applicant’s treatment, diagnosis, or prognosis was 
provided. 
  
Policies 
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective within the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
 
 
3 
 
 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the security concerns related to this guideline: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);   
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of substance use disorder; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant illegally purchased and used prescription medication weekly from 2011 
into 2015, and also used marijuana in 2015. He used the illegal substances while holding 
a security clearance. In June 2015, he was diagnosed with opioid dependence. The 
evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 26 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline. Three may apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred weekly for four years from 2011 into 2015. He 
used marijuana while in treatment for opioid addiction. His past drug use occurred with 
sufficient frequency to raise ongoing concerns about Applicant’s current trustworthiness 
and judgment. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
 Applicant disclosed and acknowledged his history of illegal drug and marijuana 
use. He stated that he has not used illegal substances since mid-2015, approximately 
three years ago. He said he did not intend to use illegal substances in the future and no 
longer associates with people who use illegal drugs. There is evidence to establish some 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b)(1).  
 
 Applicant stated that he participated in and completed a substance abuse 
treatment program in 2015. However, he did not submit evidence detailing his 
participation, completion of the program, along with a discharge summary, or compliance 
with any recommended aftercare program. Although he received a diagnosis of opioid 
dependence while in treatment, there is no evidence that he received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional, subsequent to that treatment. There 
is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 26(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honestly and 
voluntarily disclosed to the Government his significant history of abusing prescription 
drugs and marijuana. While there is some evidence that he is committed to not engaging 
in similar conduct in the future, it is insufficient to conclude that he has successfully 
overcome his three or four year drug addiction. Applicant’s repeated illegal use of a 
prescription drug and use of marijuana while holding a security clearance is a serious 
security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. He did not met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for drug involvement and substance misuse. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:            Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
