1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-02400 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
May 23, 2018 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines F, 
Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. Her failure to timely file and pay 
Federal and state income taxes, along with her failure to disclose those delinquent taxes, 
remain of concern. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations; and E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), effective June 8, 2017 (AG).  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR (Item 2) on August 24, 2017, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 5, 
2017. Applicant received it on October 10, 2017. The Government’s evidence is identified 
as Items 1 through 5. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to 
the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to 
respond beyond the 30-day period she was afforded. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into 
the record.1 The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. She married her second husband in 2008. She has two 
adult children and one adult stepchild. She has worked for her employer, a defense 
contractor, since March 2004. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b through 1.g, with explanations. She denied 
SOR allegations 1.a, and 2.a.2 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that Applicant was indebted to the Federal Government for 
delinquent taxes in the amount of $9,242 for tax year 2006. Applicant denied this 
allegation because, “Tax year 2006 is a tax liability that belongs to my spouse and was 
incurred prior to our marriage in 2008.” (Item 2.) She provided a one page document 
addressed solely to her husband from the IRS regarding a payment agreement for unpaid 
taxes from 2006, 2009, and 2010. However, Item 4 contains an Installment agreement 
covering tax periods 2006, 2009, and 2010, in which Applicant agreed to pay the federal 
taxes due for 2006. She signed the agreement and accepted liability. (Item 4.) She has 
not produced sufficient documentation to substantiate this debt is not her liability. This 
debt is unresolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that Applicant was indebted to the Federal Government for 
delinquent taxes in the approximate amount of $53,517 for the 2009 tax year. SOR ¶ 1.c 
alleged that Applicant was indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in 
the approximate amount of $26,244 for the 2010 tax year. Item 4 included an IRS account 
transcript for tax years 2009 and 2010, which showed that as of May 2017, Applicant 
owed these debts. She documented a July 2017 payment agreement between her 
                                                          
1 Item 5 would normally be inadmissible. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted 
by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on March 2, 2017. Applicant did not adopt the 
summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation (ROI) summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. However, Item 5 will be admitted for the limited purpose of consideration of any 
exculpatory information therein. 
 
2 With respect to allegation 2.a, Applicant wrote “admit” but clarified that she did not intentionally falsify 
her Answer. (Item 2.) Her clarifications are interpreted as a denial.  
 
3 
 
 
husband and the IRS for monthly payments of $1,004, but no documentation of actual 
payments under this agreement were submitted. Further, IRS account transcripts from 
2011 show that Applicant has had payment arrangements with the IRS in the past, but 
the agreements were not successfully maintained. These debts are unresolved. (Item 2; 
Item 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleged that Applicant failed to timely file her 2009, 2010, 2011, and 
2012 Federal income tax returns. Her tax transcripts for tax year 2009 show that a 
substitute return was prepared by the IRS in May 2012, after an inquiry for non-filing of 
her tax return was sent in November 2011. Item 4 also contained a 2009 IRS Form 1040 
that was unsigned and undated. (Item 4.) Applicant’s 2010 IRS account transcript 
documented that her 2010 income tax return was filed late, in September 2012. (Item 4.) 
Her 2011 IRS account transcript reflected that her 2011 tax return was filed late, in 
September 2012, and no extension on the filing date was recorded. (Item 4.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged that Applicant was indebted to state 1’s taxation authority in the 
amount of $9,092 for 2008. Applicant admitted this debt, but stated, “the amount owed 
for this year is and has been in dispute with the state.” She also claimed to have a 
payment plan in place, but failed to provide documentation of actual payments on this 
debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 4; Item 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleged that Applicant failed to timely file her 2007, 2008, and 2009 state 
1 income tax returns. Documentation in Item 4 shows: a copy of a 2007 state 1 return that 
is undated; state 1 income tax returns for 2008 that were signed and dated April 23, 2014; 
and 2009 state 1 income tax returns that were prepared on September 13, 2011, but bear 
no signatures. Applicant admitted this allegation and stated, “All tax returns have been 
filed for these years.” (Item 2; Item 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged that Applicant failed to timely file her 2007 and 2008 state 2 
income tax returns. Copies of her state 2 income tax returns for 2007 that she submitted 
are unsigned and undated. Her 2008 state 2 income tax returns were signed and dated 
April 23, 2014. (Item 4.) Applicant admitted this allegation and stated, “All tax returns have 
been filed for these years.” (Item 2; Item 4.) 
 
In her Answer, Applicant claimed that “since 2013 all tax returns have been filed 
on time with no debt owed to the Federal Government or state for those years.” (Item 2.) 
She provided no documentation to substantiate this claim. 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her failure to timely 
file and pay her Federal and state income taxes on her January 30, 2014 e-QIP. In section 
26 of the e-QIP, she was asked, “In the past seven (7) years, have you failed to file or 
pay Federal, state or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?” She answered 
“No.” She claimed “it was [her] interpretation that the question was asking if [she] had any 
unfiled taxes as of that date.” She believed all taxes had been filed, so she answered no. 
Her claim is not credible. She knew she had failed to pay taxes for multiple years, and the 
evidence shows that her 2008 state 1 and state 2 tax returns were not signed until April 
 
4 
 
 
2014, which was after the January 2014 e-QIP was certified and submitted. Further, the 
IRS prepared substitute tax returns for tax year 2009. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 “Failure to comply with Federal tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem 
with abiding by well-established government rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance 
with rules and regulations is essential for protecting classified information.” See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  
 
In the instant case, Applicant failed to file Federal tax returns in a timely manner. 
She failed to timely file her state 1 income tax returns from 2007 to 2009. She failed to 
timely file her state 2 income tax returns in 2007 and 2008. Additionally, she is indebted 
to the Federal Government for tax years 2006, 2009, and 2010. She is indebted to state 
1 for tax year 2008. Her failure to comply with Federal and state tax laws raises questions 
about whether Applicant has demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability 
 
6 
 
 
that is required for granting an individual access to classified information. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has presented some evidence to show her delinquent Federal and state 
tax returns have been filed. However, she remains indebted to the Federal Government 
for tax years 2006, 2009, and 2010; and to state 1 for tax year 2008. Her debts are 
ongoing. She failed to establish that AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b) fully provide mitigation of the 
Government’s concerns. 
 
 Applicant did not document any participation in financial counseling. She has not 
documented compliance with her payment arrangements with the IRS or state 1, nor fully 
established a track record of timely filing tax returns, as required by law. Mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(g) has not been fully established.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
7 
 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying her e-QIP. When a falsification allegation 
is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.3  
 
In this instance, it is apparent from Applicant’s comments that she was aware of 
unpaid Federal and state tax obligations and should have also been aware of her state 1 
and state 2 delinquent 2008 returns. She should have disclosed these facts to the 
Government. I find substantial evidence of an intent by Applicant to omit, conceal, or 
falsify these facts from and on her e-QIP. Therefore, security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) 
are established. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them were 
established by the evidence. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct 
her falsifications or concealments. She provided no information that indicates she was ill-
advised in completing her e-QIP. Falsifying information is a serious offense, and Applicant 
has shown that similar lapses in judgment are likely to occur. Further, she failed to take 
responsibility for her actions. She has not provided sufficient information in this record to 
demonstrate that she has met her burden of proof to mitigate her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant ignored her legal 
obligation to file and pay Federal and state income tax returns for multiple years, and 
falsified her e-QIP concerning these facts. She did not demonstrate rehabilitation, so 
recurrence is not unlikely and the potential for duress remains undiminished. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns under Guidelines F and E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
