 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03001 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, and G, alcohol consumption,. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 22, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) 
A. There were no objections to any exhibits and all of them were admitted into evidence. 
The record was held open until April 5, 2018, to permit Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant provided an email and it is marked as AE B. It 
was admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 30, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1991 and a master’s 
degree in 2002. He married in 2010 and has a 16-year-old stepdaughter. He has 
worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since about February 2017. 
Before then he was self-employed from February 2013 to January 2017. He worked in 
consulting from August 2011 to December 2012.2  
 
 The SOR alleged a delinquent mortgage account (¶ 1.a-$37,355). This debt is for 
a second mortgage. The original loan was $28,000. He used the proceeds of the loan to 
purchase a car and for living expenses from 2006 to 2008. Applicant explained that in 
March 2011 he underwent heart surgery. After the surgery and rehabilitation period, he 
lost his job and missed mortgage payments. At the time, he intended to put the house 
up for sale and move to a house his wife owned in a different state. After missing 
several mortgage payments, he decided to let the house be foreclosed, and he moved. 
He stated he ignored the debt for several months until the creditor contacted him.3 He 
testified:  
 
Due to lack of lack of hubris or certain facts that I misunderstood, I did not 
make monthly payments for a certain period of time while I was 
negotiating that settlement number, and then I realized that was a mistake 
and entered into a payment plan.4 
 
In his answer to the SOR, he stated that the debt was charged off in February 
2013, and he “negotiated with [creditor] to attempt a [s]ettlement amount.” He indicated 
he did this on various dates from 2013 to 2016. He testified that in June 2013, the 
creditor agreed to accept a payment of $25 a month for the debt, and he has been 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 18-22. 
 
3 Tr. 22-24, 30-31. 
 
4 Tr. 24. 
 
3 
 
 
paying the debt every month. He stated the agreement is in writing, but did not provide 
a copy of it. No documents were provided to corroborate his payments.5 
 
 Applicant disclosed this debt on his September 2016 security clearance 
application (SCA). He disclosed the creditor had offered him a settlement agreement in 
September 2016, but he did not have the funds to pay it. He further disclosed that he 
had a payment plan with the creditor, and the first payment was due in September 2016 
and would continue until paid in full.6  
 
In his October 2017 SOR answer, Applicant stated that he made payments of 
$25 to the creditor in September 2016, and from June 2017 through October 2017. He 
made payments of $20 in October 2016; $10 in November 2016; and no payments from 
December 2016 to May 2017.7 He testified that he started an automatic bank withdrawal 
in July 2017 to consistently make the payments. He did not provide documentary proof 
of his payments.8 
 
In his post-hearing response, Applicant indicated that he had a payment plan 
agreement with the creditor until the balance is fully paid or a settlement agreement is 
accepted. He stated he was not interested in a settlement amount. He was unable to 
provide documentation because of the time restraints.9 Applicant testified that in the 
past he agreed to negotiate a settlement amount with the creditor, but one was never 
agreed upon. He stated that he always intended to pay this debt. He said that he is 
fiscally responsible and saves for his stepdaughter’s college education and his 
retirement.10 Applicant annual income is approximately $140,000 and a bonus 
percentage. His wife’s annual income from a part time job is approximately $9,000. No 
documents were provided to corroborate consistent payments to the creditor or an 
agreed upon plan.  
 
 In February 2012, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI), endangering a child under 14 years of age with DUI, violation of the 
move-over law, and open container law. Applicant pled guilty to DUI. As a condition of 
his guilty plea, the other charges were dropped.11  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 15, 22-28. 
 
6 Tr. 31; GE 1. 
 
7 Answer to SOR. 
 
8 Answer to the SOR. 
 
9 AE B. 
 
10 Tr. 85-88. 
 
11 Tr. 32. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified that prior to his arrest, he and his wife were splitting time 
between two residences in two different states. While he and his wife were packing to 
leave and drive to their other house, they both were consuming alcohol. They started 
drinking about 12:00 p.m. and began their trip around 4:00 p.m. He estimated they each 
consumed six shots of alcohol. Their daughter was 10 years old at the time. He stated 
this was the first time he and his wife consumed shots of alcohol together. He said he 
did not feel intoxicated. Applicant testified his blood alcohol content (BAC) was over 
.15%.12 
 
 Applicant was sentenced to a one-year probation, fined, and was required to 
complete a Level I DUI course. He said that although he and his wife did not have a 
history of alcohol issues, they discussed reducing their alcohol consumption. Applicant 
said he went to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and got a sponsor. He described himself as 
a binge drinker. His wife went to Al-ANON. She stopped drinking alcohol after the 
incident, but resumed in 2014. He successfully completed the terms of his sentence and 
probation.13  
 
 In February 2016, Applicant was arrested for a second DUI. He pled guilty to DUI 
and was sentenced to 12-months probation and fines. His driver’s license was revoked 
for five years. He was ordered to install an ignition interlock on his vehicle if he was 
issued a temporary license for hardship. The ignition lock was placed on his vehicle in 
October 2017 and he has been in compliance with maintaining that requirement. He 
was directed to complete a state-sponsored DUI or drunk risk reduction program. At the 
time of the arrest, Applicant’s BAC was .39%.14  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his September 2016 SCA the circumstances of his 
February 2016 arrest.15 He told the government investigator during his March 2017 
interview that he was no longer consuming alcohol.16  
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified that during this time prior to his February 2016 
DUI, he was primarily working from home. He had a bottle of alcohol that he hid at 
home. He had recently lost his job for poor performance and went to Fedex to return 
some equipment. He then went to the movie theater and consumed 8 shots of alcohol. 
He then drove about a half mile and stopped his car in a parking lot because he was too 
drunk to drive. He called his wife on the telephone. He passed out in the car and 
someone called the police. The car keys were in the ignition and it was running. His wife 
was at a restaurant, and she was on her way to get him when the police arrived. He 
                                                          
12 Tr. 32-41. 
 
13 Tr. 41-47. 
 
14 Tr. 51, 53, 55-60; AE A. 
 
15 Answer to SOR. 
 
16 GE 1, 4. 
 
 
5 
 
 
said that he was intoxicated for 8 days before he lost his job and was arrested for this 
DUI. Applicant’s AA sponsor contacted him, but Applicant told him to stop calling him.17  
 
 At his court appearance, Applicant was told that in lieu of jail he could attend a 
10-day DUI level II alcohol rehabilitation residential program. He chose the program and 
completed it in November 2016. He was diagnosed with severe alcohol dependence.18 
It was recommended that he enroll in a 12-step program. He went back to AA. He was 
placed on probation for 12 months and ordered to see an alcohol counselor for 12 visits. 
He testified he saw the counselor for 18 visits. He testified that he successfully 
completed this court-ordered counseling in February 2017. He testified he complied with 
the restrictions on his driver’s license and now has a restricted license, and an ignition 
interlock on his vehicle.19  
 
 Applicant testified he went to AA from the time of his first DUI arrest in 2012 until 
a month before his 2016 DUI arrest. He stated he has a sponsor again and attends AA 
three times a week.20  
 
 Applicant testified that he took a leave of absence from work in April through 
June 2017 and completed a 90-day residential alcohol treatment program. While there 
he reflected on his DUI arrests, reckless conduct, and binge drinking. He said he was 
able to confront diversions and learn temptation triggers that are no longer present in 
his life. He continues to have alcohol in the house because his wife still drinks.21 
 
 Applicant was asked when was the last time he consumed an alcoholic 
beverage? He testified that it was in December 2017 when he had three drinks of 
alcohol. He had one in the airport, one on the plane, and one at the airport where he 
landed. He explained he had a habit of going to the bar when he was at airports. He 
said it was what he had always done when flying. He stated: “It was a habit that I then 
addressed in therapy and was able to come up with a solution to.”22 He said he has 
been to airports twice since December 2017 and did not drink. He said he told his AA 
sponsor about his consumption of alcohol. He further stated that this incident is not part 
of who he is. He realizes the destruction his drinking will cause, so he looks for the 
support of his wife and stepdaughter. He stated: alcohol is not a factor in his life. He 
said he does not intend to consume alcohol again. He stated that after his December 
2017 drinking incident, he took two weeks off from work and did an intensive outpatient 
                                                          
17 Tr. 47-52. 
 
18 No medical reports were provided or information regarding the professional qualifications of the health 
care provider who made the diagnosis..  
 
19 Tr. 60-62; AE A. 
 
20 Tr. 45, 62. 
 
21 Tr. 47, 68-74. 
 
22 Tr. 66. 
 
6 
 
 
program from December 12th through 23rd. No corroborating documents were provided 
regarding to show he had successfully completed an outpatient treatment program and 
all aftercare requirements.23  
 
 Applicant stated he participates in a religious affiliated alcohol-step program that 
he attended once a month for about 18 months, in addition to AA. He contacts the 
counselor who he saw after his second DUI from his residential program about once a 
month. He said that in 2016, he and his wife went to a marriage counselor who 
specializes in alcohol abuse.24  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
23 Tr. 63-75, 79. 
 
24 Tr. 76-84. 
 
7 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a large delinquent mortgage debt that he defaulted on in 2011. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant defaulted on a loan in 2011. He has made inconsistent small payments  
since 2016. He testified that he has a payment plan with the creditor that requires him to 
pay $25 a month on the $37,355 debt. The information he provided showed that he 
missed several months of payments and some were for less than the full amount. He 
did not provide a copy of that agreement or documentary corroboration for payments 
made to date. There is insufficient evidence to conclude the debt occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His failure to responsibly repay the debt cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Insufficient 
evidence was provided to show the debt was the result of circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control. 
 
 No evidence was presented that Applicant has participated in financial 
counseling. His minimal inconsistent payments do not reflect that the problem is under 
control, or that the payments constitute a good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditor. 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
9 
 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant was convicted of DUI in 2012 and 2016. His 2012 offense occurred 
while his 10-year old stepdaughter was in the car. He was diagnosed with severe 
alcohol dependence. Despite his completion of alcohol rehabilitation programs, and a 
statement that he did not intend to consume alcohol in the future, shortly after receiving 
the SOR, he consumed three alcoholic drinks in December 2017. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to conclude that future alcohol-related incident are unlikely to recur. He 
 
10 
 
 
indicated that he participated in extensive alcohol counseling, but did not provide 
evidence of that participation, a favorable prognosis, or satisfactory progress in a 
treatment plan. He indicated that he now has control over his alcohol issues, but after 
participating in a 90-day residential alcohol treatment program that ended in June 2017, 
he began consuming alcohol in an airport bar in December 2017. This occurred after 
receiving the SOR in October 2017, and being aware of the Government’s concerns. 
Applicant acknowledges his pattern of maladaptive behavior, but the evidence does not 
demonstrate that he has adequately addressed his alcohol issues. Applicant 
presumably has abstained from alcohol consumption since December 2017, a mere 
three months before his hearing, which is an insufficient amount of time given his history 
of alcohol abuse.  
 
Applicant’s first DUI resulted after consuming six shots of alcohol before he was 
to drive with his daughter to his second home. His second DUI occurred after he lost his 
job and drove his car a short way before the police found him passed out with the car 
running. His BAC at the time of the first arrest was .15%, and at the time of the second 
arrest it was .39%. The evidence is insufficient to apply any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old educated man. He defaulted on a loan in 2011 and has 
made minimal efforts to responsibly resolve it. Applicant has two DUI convictions. 
Despite uncorroborated alcohol treatments and counseling through June 2017, he 
 
11 
 
 
consumed alcohol in December 2017. He has not established a significant period of 
abstinence and his conduct continues to raise questions about his judgment, reliability, 
and ability to control impulses. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern arising 
under the financial considerations and alcohol consumption guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
