 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01835 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 8, 2015, 
requesting a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. On June 13, 2017, the 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on July 
13, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 17, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 13, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for November 14, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H were admitted into evidence without objection. 
In a post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted several documents marked as AE I 
that were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 73-year-old operations supervisor for a government contractor. He 
is a high school graduate and received electrician’s training while enlisted in the U.S. 
Navy. He honorably served in the Navy from 1965 to 1989 as a cryptologic technician 
until he retired. He has worked in his current job since 1989, although the companies 
holding the contract have changed. He married in 1973 and has three adult children. He 
has held a security clearance continuously since 1966. 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling nearly $40,000. Applicant 
generally denied the allegations, and provided explanations and documentation with his 
Answer to the SOR. 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was injured in a fall and was hospitalized in 2009. She 
underwent multiple surgeries for a broken hip and wrist, was hospitalized for an extended 
period, and was unable to work. She then incurred an extended rehabilitation period. 
Since then, she requires the use of a wheelchair. Insurance paid some of the medical 
bills, but Applicant claimed that most were not covered. Applicant incurred out-of-pocket 
expenses and the loss of his spouse’s income during that period.  
 
 Applicant suffered substantial financial strain and his home fell into foreclosure, 
but the lender self-imposed a moratorium on foreclosures after the discovery of company-
wide mortgage irregularities. The mortgage issue was not alleged in the SOR. A civil 
proceeding brought by the creditor was dismissed. Applicant sought advice from an 
attorney, who advised him not to pay the mortgage during the moratorium period, but to 
save the money to pay in a lump sum when the moratorium was lifted. Beginning in 2013, 
Applicant began recovering financially, paid lump sums on his mortgage and reinstated 
his regular mortgage payments. He has been current on his mortgage for a number of 
years and pays on time. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a involves a charged-off debt for $17,807 to a creditor for which Applicant 
is unaware. The joint account became delinquent in 2011. Applicant’s spouse disputed 
the debt in 2014 with a letter to the creditor disputing the amount owed, notifying them of 
the expiration of the statute of limitations, and requesting that it be removed from their 
credit report. The creditor did not respond to the letter. The debt is currently listed in 
Applicant’s credit report as charged off. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b involves a credit card debt that has been charged off for $6,816. In 
2011, the account became delinquent, and in 2012, Applicant received an IRS Form 
1099-C notifying him of the cancelation of the debt. Applicant included the debt relief on 
his tax return. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c involves a collection account from a credit card account for $5,743. The 
account became delinquent in 2011. In 2013, Applicant received a collection letter from 
an agency claiming to be collecting the debt. It indicated that if the debt was not disputed, 
it would be considered a valid debt. Applicant’s spouse disputed the debt with the agency 
by letter and spoke to a representative on the phone. The collection agency did not 
respond to the dispute letter, but noted the disputed account in Applicant’s credit report. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d involves a charged-off credit card account for $5,338. In 2015, an IRS 
Form 1099-C was issued to Applicant, and he included the debt forgiveness on his income 
tax return. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e involves a charged-off credit card account for $899. In 2014, an IRS 
Form 1099-C was issued to Applicant, and he included the debt relief on his income tax 
return. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f involves a charged-off gas card account for $469. Applicant testified that 
he negotiated and paid a settlement in 2009, and the debt was removed from his credit 
report. However, when he reapplied for another credit card from the same creditor in 
2015, the old debt reappeared on his credit report. Applicant’s recent credit report shows 
the original debt was charged off and the account was closed. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g involves a department store credit card account in collection for $569. 
Applicant’s spouse disputed the debt with the collection agent in 2013. Applicant claimed 
that the agent did not respond to the dispute letter, but the account has been removed 
from his credit report. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h involves a department store credit card account in collection for $2,307. 
Applicant noted that he is unaware of the basis for this account, and that it has been 
removed from his credit report. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report shows that he is current on all other credit 
accounts and his mortgage. His income has recently increased and he now earns 
approximately $160,000 per year from various sources, including military retirement, 
Social Security, and former company retirement accounts, and is able to meet his monthly 
budget needs and provide financial assistance to his children and grandchildren. 
Applicant’s spouse managed the household debts in the past, and initiated the debt 
disputes without consulting Applicant. He was unaware of many of the existing credit 
accounts until he was interviewed by a government investigator in March 2016.  
 
 Applicant now oversees his spouse’s management of the household budget and 
payment of bills, and they are committed to ensure that they have no further financial 
difficulties. Applicant testified that he engaged a debt counselor in 2009, but all financial 
issues were not resolved. He again sought assistance from a non-profit credit counselor 
in 2017, but the counselor was unable to provide assistance because all of the delinquent 
accounts noted in the SOR were past the state statute of limitations. The counselor 
advised Applicant to take no further action on those accounts so as to not toll the statute 
and revive the claims. 
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems and incurred delinquent debts following a 
significant family medical event. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to significant expenses resulting from 
his spouse’s 2009 fall and subsequent surgeries and rehabilitation. This situation and the 
resulting loss of his spouse’s income undoubtedly contributed to his financial 
delinquencies as was evidenced by his sudden mortgage and credit card delinquencies 
in the years following. Once he regained control of his finances in about 2014, he 
corrected his mortgage delinquencies and his spouse took significant effort to resolve the 
delinquent debts as necessary. Although Applicant was generally unaware of the credit 
card delinquencies until he was interviewed by an investigator in 2016, he provided 
evidence of actions taken in the prior years with regard to the SOR debts. Most of the 
debts have been resolved, and others are no longer in an active collection status as they 
are significantly dated and past the state statute of limitations period. These elderly debts 
no longer pose a security risk or raise financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 Applicant sought advice from an attorney and credit counselors over the years. He 
is current on his mortgage and has had no new delinquencies in the past several years. 
Applicant’s SOR debts are dated, he and his spouse sought assistance when necessary, 
and followed legal means to address most of them. Others are no longer in an active 
collection status. He has shown financial responsibility through the past several years 
since recovering from the family medical emergency, and his finances are currently in 
good condition. Based on Applicant’s most current credit report, significant income from 
various sources, and his involvement in the household finances, I believe his financial 
status is good and his credit management is under control. The likelihood of a recurrence 
of financial difficulty is low. Applicant’s past financial issues no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (e) are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
7 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s testimony, his honorable military service, his 52-year 
security clearance status, and documents provided after the hearing. Applicant has 
shown current financial responsibility and appears to have control of his finances with his 
spouse. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
