KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge erred in her analysis of the risks arising from his support to U.S. forces in
Iraq.  The Judge focused on the risks to Applicant’s family arising from his support to U.S.
forces and did not address how that support weighs in his favor in analyzing his national security
eligibility.  The Board has recognized that, when an applicant has established by credible,
independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures and regulations
occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant made a
significant contribution to national security, those circumstances can give credibility to an
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report attempts at
coercion and exploitation. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 17-00629.a1
DATE: 05/24/2018
DATE: May 24, 2018
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00629
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 3, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).1  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
February 1, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand the decision to correct
identified errors.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant, who is 30 years old, was born in Iraq.  From about 2006 to 2008, he worked for
U.S. forces in Iraq.  Although terrorists never threatened him or his family, they consider all
translators to be traitors.  
In 2008, Applicant entered the U.S. under a special immigrant visa program.  Between 2010
and 2012, he returned to Iraq to marry and to live with his family for six months.  He became a U.S.
citizen in 2014.  After obtaining his citizenship, he returned to Iraq for a month and then worked in
another country and Iraq until the latter part of 2015.  In early 2016, he started to work for his
current employer and deployed to Iraq.  He does not own any property in Iraq.  Three U.S. military
officers consider Applicant to be extremely responsible and trustworthy.
Applicant’s father is deceased.  His mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq.  She retired after
working for the Iraqi Government and receives a small pension.  Applicant contacts her regularly
and provides her with less than $2,000 annually in financial support.  While he was working in Iraq,
he called his mother frequently, and she visited him.  He has a brother who is a citizen and resident
of Iraq.  He communicates with him only at holidays.  He has two other siblings who are Iraqi
citizens, but reside in the United States.  His mother-in-law and four siblings-in-law are citizens and
residents of Iraq.  His mother-in-law is a housewife and his siblings-in-law are students.  His wife
communicates with those siblings when she calls her mother.  
Iraq faces many challenges, including sectarian and ethnic divisions.  Numerous terrorist
groups are active throughout Iraq, and the threat of violence is high there.  The Department of State
warns U.S. citizens that all travel to Iraq should be avoided.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Given the terrorists threats in Iraq, Applicant’s family relationships in that country create a
heightened risk of foreign pressure or exploitation.  Those relationships are ongoing and create a
1 The two Guideline B allegations were amended at the hearing.  Applicant had no objection to the amendments
and the record remained open after the hearing to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional evidence
pertinent to the amendments.  Decision at 2.
potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligations to protect sensitive information and
his desire to help family members.  His frequent visits to Iraq before and after becoming a U.S.
citizen, including a recent long deployment, demonstrate longstanding and substantial commitments
to Iraq.  While there are factors that weigh in his favor, he has failed to mitigate the security
concerns pertaining to foreign influence.
Discussion
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
In this case, Applicant contends the Judge erred in concluding that his “‘recent long
deployment for work’ to Iraq was a disqualifying condition[.]”  Appeal Brief at 5, citing Decision
at 8.  Applicant’s contention is persuasive.  While the Judge did not categorize Applicant’s recent
deployment as a “disqualifying condition,” she considered his deployment to be a factor weighing
against his national security eligibility by stating it demonstrated longstanding and substantial
commitments to Iraq.  In general, an applicant’s deployment to a combat zone in support of U.S.
forces is not a factor that weighs against his or her national security eligibility.  On the contrary,
such deployments tend to establish various mitigating conditions such as ¶ 8(b) (“there is no conflict
of interest . . . because . . . the individual has such deep and longstanding loyalties in the United
States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest”);2  ¶ 8(d) (“the foreign . . . activities are on U.S. Government business”);3 and ¶ 8(f) (“the
value or routine nature of the foreign business . . . is such that [it is] unlikely to result in a conflict
of interest and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”)4 
Given the record in this case, we conclude the Judge erred by weighing Applicant’s recent
deployment in an arbitrary and capricious manner and in failing to address the application of
mitigating conditions 8(d) and 8(f).  More specifically, the Judge failed to articulate a satisfactory
basis for her unfavorable conclusion regarding Applicant’s recent deployment and, as discussed
more fully below, that conclusion appears to run counter to the record evidence.
2 Directive, Encl. 2. App A ¶ 8(b) states, “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
3 Directive, Encl 2, App. A ¶ 8(d) states, “ the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business
or are approved by the agency head or designee[.]”
4 Directive, Encl 2, App A ¶ 8(f) states, “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence,
manipulate, or pressure the individual.”
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in her analysis of the risks arising from his
support to U.S. forces in Iraq.   We agree.  The Judge focused on the risks to Applicant’s family
arising from his support to U.S. forces and did not address how that support weighs in his favor in
analyzing his national security eligibility.  The Board has recognized that, when an applicant has
established by credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant
made a significant contribution to national security, those circumstances can give credibility to an
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report attempts at coercion
and exploitation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008).  
In this case, the record contains statements from U.S. military members attesting to the
support Applicant provided in dangerous circumstances.  In 2006, Applicant served with a Quick
Reaction Force in Iraq.  Exhibit (AE) A and SOR Response.  One senior enlisted member, who
served with Applicant during that time period, stated:
[Applicant] . . . served alongside my men during moments of intense combat
operations.   [He] was regularly trusted with sensitive information and privy to plans
for numerous operations.  I nor anyone else ever questioned his loyalty to the men,
the mission, or the United States. [His] performance was exemplary and he was often
called upon by my company and battalion commander to assist in higher level
missions.  I have the utmost trust in his dedication, loyalty, and patriotism.5 
Applicant testified that he qualified for a special immigrant visa due to his support of U.S. forces
under circumstances that presented dangers.  Tr. at 54 and 62-63.  Another senior enlisted member
also noted that Applicant served honorably in “an arduous, high OPTEMPO, combat environment”
in 2017.  AE F.  Such evidence demonstrates that Applicant has repeatedly been willing to assume
a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S. and shows his ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could
be sufficiently strong enough to support a favorable application of mitigating condition 8(b).  See
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006) (An applicant’s work in support of U.S.
forces in Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous high-risk circumstances in which  [he]
made a significant contribution to national security.”)  See also ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App.
Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008); and ISCR Case No. 10-
02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012).  Here, the Judge erred by failing to analyze the Guideline B
security concerns in the context of Applicant’s record of support to U.S. forces under dangerous
circumstances.  
The case is remanded to the Judge for issuance of a new decision in accordance with the
Directive that corrects the errors identified above.  On remand, the Judge is permitted to reopen the
record on the motion of either party. 
5 AE F.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
