 
 
 
 
1 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-01430 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                     For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On August 4, 2017, 
Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the 
case on February 27, 2018. The matter was scheduled on April 13, 2018, for a May 9, 
2018, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered five documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-5. Applicant gave testimony and 
offered eight documents, accepted without objection as Exs. A-H. The record was left 
open through May 17, 2018, to provide the parties with sufficient time to submit 
additional materials. In the interim, a transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
May 18, 2018. With no additional materials received, the transcript was closed on May 
22, 2018, and the record was closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old service engineer who has worked for the same 
government contractor for a year. He presently generated approximately $120,000 a 
year in income. Applicant has earned a high school diploma. He served on active duty 
in the U.S. military from 1997 until 2005, when he received an honorable discharge. For 
many years, Applicant maintained a part-time consulting position in addition to his work 
as an engineer. Applicant has worked continuously with no breaks in his primary 
employment since 2005.  
 
 Applicant was late in filing his tax years (TY) 2013-2015 tax returns. Initially, in 
TY 2013, this was due, in part, because his part-time consulting income had 
unexpectedly caused him to owe taxes, rather than received a refund, for the first time. 
He could not pay the sum, approximately $1,900, and he was unaware he could have 
worked out a payment plan or some other accommodation with the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS). (Tr. 20) He faced the same dilemma the next year after preparing his tax 
returns for TY 2014.  
 
In the end, Applicant filed tax returns for TY 2013, TY 2014, and TY 2015 in April 
2017, owing tax money for that three-year period for the same reasons noted above. He 
submitted his already prepared tax returns after a friend recommended he contact the 
IRS to arrange for a payment plan. (Tr. 22) After filing his federal returns, a payment 
plan was established with the IRS, under which about $270 a month would be debited 
from his checking account. Applicant ended up owing the IRS $1,900 for TY 2013 and 
about $900 for TY 2015. In addition, refunds owed for TY 2016 and TY 2017 were 
applied to his debt. He completed this IRS payment plan around April 2018. (Tr. 23) 
 
Also in around April 2017, Applicant filed his state income tax returns for those 
same years. With his state tax situation, he was owed refunds from his state for each 
year. His refunds were largely directed to his federal debt and applied toward the IRS 
payment plan. (Tr. 24-25) 
 
Aside from these tax issues, Applicant acquired some delinquent debt over the 
past decade. That debt mostly arose when Applicant’s mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
and sister-in-law all moved in with Applicant and his wife for various periods of time 
around 2008-2010. Their presence increased household expenses on everything from 
utilities and transportation to groceries. Their addition to his household became 
particularly onerous in 2010.  
 
In early 2010, Applicant lost his second job, a highly lucrative part-time position 
paying approximately $2,400 a month. This happened when his employer’s workload 
was reduced and Applicant’s consulting services were no longer needed. (Tr. 32-33) 
 
 
 
 
3 
After losing that income, Applicant could barely afford to cover all of his family’s 
expenses plus the financial needs of his in-laws. (Tr. 31) That reduction in income 
serves as a backdrop to the creation of most of the delinquent debts noted in the SOR: 
 
1.c – Collection account ($500) – Paid. Applicant had thought this account had 
been paid off. (Tr. 25) By the time he discovered a balance owed, he no longer had 
documentation regarding his past payments on that account. Therefore, he setup a 
payment plan to address the balance owed. The balance was satisfied by December 
2017 and is now zero. (Ex. A) 
 
1.d – Utility collection account ($85) – No documentation of payment. Applicant 
testified that he paid this debt and said he would try to find a receipt for the account 
reflecting a zero balance, but none was received. (Tr. 27) 
 
1.e – 1.i - Medical collection accounts ($80, $65, $56, $56, $56) – Paid. Applicant 
was previously unaware of these outstanding debts. (Tr. 27-28) He had not noted them 
on his credit report as he did not recognize the name of the collection entity. When they 
were brought to his attention, he called the collection agent and discovered he owed a 
total balance of approximately $391.95. Applicant showed that the debt was paid and 
the balance is now reflected as zero.  (Tr. 28; SOR Response, attachment)   
 
1.j – Adverse medical judgment ($260) – Paid. Unbeknownst to Applicant, this 
judgment was filed against Applicant in January in 2013. Applicant provided 
documentary evidence reflecting that it was paid before the issuance of thee SOR. (Tr. 
29; SOR Response, attachment)  
 
1.k – Adverse judgment ($942) – Paid. This debt was also filed against an 
unknowing Applicant in January 2014. The obligation is related to a merchant-based 
credit card. Applicant provided documentary evidence reflecting this balance was 
satisfied in December 2016, before the issuance of the SOR. (Tr. 30; SOR Response, 
attachment) 
 
Today, Applicant is living well within his means. At present, Applicant is making 
adjustments to the family budget using a computer-based program. His in-laws are no 
longer a part of his household. Applicant generally has a net monthly remainder to 
reserve for emergencies. He owns his home. His wife works for a private school and 
earns about $9-$10 an hour. Applicant has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 38) 
 
Free from payments to the IRS, Applicant has additional income to pay off a 
credit card on which he is currently in timely repayment on a $300 balance, but which 
he wishes to cancel due to a recent data breach. (Tr. 34) The card became 
compromised and was initially cancelled without Applicant’s knowledge, so now he 
wants to resolve any balance owed, cancel the replacement card, and distance himself 
from the compromised institution. He is also disputing a cable bill charge for equipment 
that Applicant returned. He is actively working with the company to resolve the matter.  
  
 
 
 
 
4 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. These guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the 
AG, the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts. An 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate admitted facts or facts proven by the Government, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant 
failed to timely file both federal and state income tax returns for TY 2013-2015 and had 
acquired some delinquent debt in the past decade. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.   
 
Under these facts, five conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
          Unaware he could establish a payment plan with the IRS when he found he owed 
federal taxes in TY 2013, Applicant put off filing his tax return for that year. That same 
scenario repeated itself in TY 2014 and 2015. In the end, as he prepared to complete 
his TY 2016 tax return, Applicant learned that he could work with the IRS and establish 
a payment plan. He immediately contacted the IRS and established such a plan to 
address the approximately $3,000 owed. He has since satisfied his IRS debt. In failing 
to file federal tax returns for those years, Applicant also failed to file state tax returns for 
those years. However, he remedied that situation as well when he prepared his TY 
2016 federal and state tax return. His state refunds were largely applied to satisfying his 
IRS debt. Applicant’s tax situation was completely resolved before the DOHA hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
           In addition, Applicant acquired a little over $2,000 in delinquent debt in recent 
years. Much of that debt he attributed to added expenses he incurred while helping 
support his mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law, as they resided with 
Applicant and his family around 2008-2010. Helping his in-laws financially overlapped 
with a difficult period of economic adjustment he experienced after his lucrative part-
time job was eliminated.  
 
          Applicant provided documentary evidence indicating all of the delinquent debts at 
issue, except for one for $85, have been paid. Indeed, some of those debts were 
satisfied before the issuance of the SOR. As for the $85 debt, Applicant credibly 
testified that the account had been previously satisfied, but that he had lost the related 
paperwork. Meanwhile, he is taking the money once devoted to IRS payments to satisfy 
the balance owed on a compromised credit card so he can terminate the account.  
 
           Given Applicant’s diligence in meeting his other obligations, I have no doubt the 
$85 utility bill balance was previously paid, and that Applicant has merely lost related 
receipts. Regardless, I am confident he will remedy the situation expeditiously and have 
the credit report entry reconciled appropriately. Today, Applicant is living within his 
means and is in control of his finances, which he monitors with a computer-based 
program. In light of all of the above, although Applicant has not received financial 
counseling, there is sufficient evidence to raise AG ¶ 20(a), (b), (d), and (g).   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old service engineer who has worked for the same 
government contractor for a year. He is a high school graduate who served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 1997 to 2005, at which point he was honorably discharged. 
Applicant has worked continuously since that time with no breaks in employment, to 
include the maintenance of a highly lucrative second job he worked for several years 
until his position was terminated in 2010.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file the federal and state tax returns he had previously 
prepared for TY 2013, TY 2014, and TY 2015 was attributable to his naiveté. He was 
simply unaware that he could work with the IRS and generate a reasonable payment 
plan for the approximately $3,000 he owed for the three years at issue. Because he did 
not file his federal returns, he likewise withheld his prepared state tax returns for those 
years, even though his state returns reflected that refunds were due. In the end, 
Applicant completed his IRS payment plan and is now in good standing with both 
 
 
 
 
7 
federal and state taxing authorities. Going forward, he better understands how to handle 
his tax issues and now knows where to turn if he has tax questions. 
 
 As for his approximately $2,000 in delinquent debt, Applicant was honestly 
unaware that some, if not most, of that debt was outstanding. He began satisfying those 
accounts before the SOR was issued. He provided documentary evidence that all but 
one debt, with an $85 balance outstanding, have been paid. As for that $85 debt, it 
seems more than likely it has already been paid. However, as he researches the issue 
further, I am confident Applicant will honorably satisfy any remaining balance owed.  
 
 Today, Applicant is living within his means and there is no evidence that he is 
currently experiencing any of the financial distractions that adversely impacted him in 
the past. He ends each month with a net remainder to apply where needed. He 
volunteered that he is working on two accounts not raised in the SOR: one involving a 
compromised credit card he wishes to satisfy and terminate, and one regarding an 
honest dispute involving the return of cable television equipment. Again, Applicant has 
the sound judgmental qualities and wherewithal to tackle these matters before they 
become issues, and the ability to continue living within his means. I am convinced going 
forward Applicant will be in control of all his tax and finance-related issues. I find 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
