 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01794 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns arising 
from bankruptcies and delinquent debts. He mitigated the criminal conduct security 
concerns. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 30, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
October 19, 2017. It issued a Notice of Hearing on December 12, 2017, setting the 
hearing for January 10, 2018. On that day, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 into evidence. Applicant testified, and offered Exhibits (AE) 1 
 
 
 
 
2 
through 15 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted.1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2018. The record remained open until February 13, 2018, 
to permit submission of additional evidence. Applicant did not provide further evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and divorced. He has a 10-year-old child for whom he 
pays child support from that marriage. He also has an adult child from a previous 
relationship. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in engineering in 1996. He has worked 
for defense contractors in the past. (Tr. 36-38; AE 3) He has not worked full-time since 
February 2015, when his full-time position was dissolved. (Tr. 39, 41; GE 1.)     
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in March 2015 when he became ill and was 
unable to work the rest of that year. In mid-2016, he began driving his car for a driving 
service. He continues to work for the driving service. Currently, he is developing a 
business that he hopes may be profitable in the future. (Tr. 41-42; AE 1) In 2015, he 
earned about $17,800; in 2016 about $12,000; and in 2017 about $32,000. Prior to his 
illness, he worked as a professional engineer earning about $72,000 annually. His sister 
helps him financially each month. (Tr. 44, 46, 47; AE 11)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2017, April 2017, and July 
2016, the SOR alleged two bankruptcies, a delinquent mortgage, four delinquent debts, 
and an insufficient funds check. The SOR allegations were reported to the credit card 
companies between 2014 and 2017. (GE 3, GE 4, GE 5, GE 6, GE 7) The status of each 
allegation is as follows: 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2016. (SOR ¶ 1.a) His liabilities 
totaled $392,519, and included an unpaid mortgage, medical bills, automobile loan, legal 
bill, telephone bills, credit card debts, and other miscellaneous bills. Those liabilities were 
discharged in November 2016. (Tr. 51; GE 6; AE 4, AE 5, AE 6) 
   
 Two months later, in January 2017, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (SOR 
¶ 1.b) He filed this bankruptcy as a method to stop the foreclosure process on his house 
and to give him time to negotiate a loan modification of the $198,675 mortgage that was 
included in the earlier Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant never made any payments into a 
Chapter 13 payment plan and the proceeding was dismissed in March 2017. Applicant’s 
last mortgage payment was in July 2014. He has continued to live in the house since 
then, but is moving because the property was sold. (Tr. 48-49, 52, 58; AE E, AE 6, AE 7) 
  
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed the state’s child support division $29,728 in 
unpaid support. (SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant stated that the correct amount is $22,000 because 
he has paid $7,000. He said he also gave his ex-wife about $600 to $800 in cash two 
                                            
1 Prior to the admission of GE 2 into evidence, Applicant made a correction to the exhibit, which is his 
personal subject interview, dated October 10, 2017. (Tr. 13-15) 
 
 
 
 
3 
months ago. He agreed to submit proof from the state of the balance owed as of January 
2018. (Tr. 54-56; AE 13) No additional evidence was submitted. 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant’s delinquent mortgage, which as of June 2017, had a 
loan balance of $219,544. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant asserted that the mortgage has been 
resolved because the house was recently sold. He stated he does not owe any money to 
the bank and that the matter has been settled. (Tr. 57-58) He did not submit 
documentation confirming his assertion that there is no deficiency owed. 
 
 In November 2017, Applicant paid the $900 delinquent parking ticket bill, alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. (AE 9) 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the $900 tollway debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. (Tr. 59) He 
negotiated a settlement, but has not been able to make payments on it. (Tr. 29; AE 9) 
 
 In 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with fraud-insufficient funds check. 
He did not appear in court as required and a warrant issued. (SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 2.a)  
Applicant said he was unaware of the warrant, but when he learned of it, he appeared 
before a judge in June 2016, and the case was dismissed. (AE 4, AE 14) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget that indicates he has about $1,000 remaining at the 
end of each month after paying expenses. (AE 7) He completed the credit counseling 
course required for filing his 2016 bankruptcy. (Tr. 49; AE 8) He said he owed the Federal 
government between $1,000 and $2,000 for unpaid 2016 income taxes. He also owed 
the state government money for unpaid 2016 taxes, but does not know the amount.2 (Tr. 
50)  
 
 Applicant submitted letters of recommendation. An executive director for a non-
profit organization complimented Applicant on his trustworthiness and technical 
knowledge. A former business associate stated Applicant is reliable and reputable. His 
sister, who works for a defense contractor, said he is trustworthy and dependable. (AE 
15) 
 
Policies 
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD after 
June 8, 2017.  
  
                                            
2 The SOR did not allege Applicant’s 2016 unpaid Federal and state income taxes; hence, those derogatory 
facts will not be considered in analyzing pertinent disqualifying conditions. Those facts may be considered 
in assessing Applicant’s credibility, and analyzing the mitigating conditions and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Three may be 
potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts, including two bankruptcies, which 
began in 2014. Some delinquent debts continue to the present. He has been unable or 
unwilling to address his debts. These facts establish prima facie evidence for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the 
resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. The following four may 
potentially apply:  
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
6 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s child support debt, delinquent mortgage, and tollway debt remain 
unresolved and are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant presented evidence 
to establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). His financial delinquencies appear to be 
the result of an illness he suffered for most of 2015, and a subsequent long period of 
unemployment or underemployment. Those were circumstances beyond his control. 
However, in order to establish full mitigation under this condition, Applicant is required to 
provide proof that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Although some of the 
debts may have been difficult to pay, Applicant accumulated significant parking tickets 
and tollway debts that were within his control. There is insufficient evidence from which 
to conclude that Applicant responsibly managed his debts while they were accumulating 
or prior to his filing bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant provided evidence that he participated in the required credit counseling 
course that is mandatory for filing bankruptcy. However, his large mortgage, a child 
support debt, and tollway debt are not resolved or being resolved. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) because there are not clear indications that his 
financial obligations or unpaid taxes for 2016 are under control. He established mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d), as to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g, which he paid or 
resolved.  
 
Guideline G: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern related to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. One may be potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
In 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with fraud-insufficient funds check. 
In June 2016, the case was dismissed. The evidence established the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 32 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s criminal conduct. The following two may potentially 
apply:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
The criminal charge was minor and occurred in 2015 almost three years ago. The 
case was dismissed in July 2016. No other criminal incidents are in the record. The 
evidence established mitigation under both of the above mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including those detailed in the 
analysis of the financial considerations and criminal conduct guidelines.  
 
Applicant is a mature individual, who began accumulating debts in 2014, most of 
which remain unresolved. Although he stated that he would submit pertinent evidence 
after the hearing to address the status of his mortgage and child support payments, he 
 
 
 
 
8 
did not. Based on insufficient evidence and his 2016 bankruptcy discharge of almost 
$400,000 of debt, he has not established a track record of responsibly managing his 
financial obligations, including his 2016 income taxes. Overall, he has not met his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations, 
but he did mitigate those raised under the guideline for criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:         Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.e:           For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.f:           Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.g:           For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
    
      Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
