1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04214 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
        Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 20, 2016.1 On December 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2018, admitting 15 of the 
allegations in the SOR and denying 12. She requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for April 11, 2018. The hearing was convened 
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
05/23/2018
 
2 
 
 
as scheduled. The Government’s Exhibits (GEs) were not available for the hearing.2 I 
left the record open until April 24, 2018, for Department Counsel to provide Applicant 
with the GEs. She did not object and (GE) 1 – 4 were submitted post-hearing and 
admitted in evidence. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open for an 
additional period until May 4, 2018, to submit documents.  
 
Applicant provided post-hearing documents marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A – E including: a monthly bill from American Education Services (AES) showing a 
payment made of $149 on March 28, 2018, and a payment of $149 due on April 19, 
2018 (AE A); a letter from the U.S. Treasury indicating that $2,294 from Applicant’s tax 
refund was applied to her Department of Education (DOE) student loan debt (AE B); a 
letter from her new DOE student loan servicer dated March 6, 2018, telling her to 
continue her payments of $5 per month on her federal student loan debt (AE C); and 
loan rehabilitation documents from Kentucky Higher Education Student Loan 
Corporation, increasing her monthly payments from $25 to $232 starting on April 26, 
2018, with a total balance owed of $6,778 (AE D).  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She graduated from high school in 2004, and attended 
college, but did not obtain a degree. (Tr. 17) She was married in 2006 and divorced in 
2017, and reports one daughter from that marriage, age 10, and one son, age 11. (Tr. 
15) Applicant remarried recently on April 1, 2018. Applicant has been employed as a 
supply technician by a federal contractor since May 2016. (Tr. 17) Applicant reports no 
previous security clearance. (Tr. 12) 
 
The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts totaling over $54,000, including debts 
placed for collections, and judgments against Applicant. Applicant “agreed” or admitted 
15 of the alleged delinquent debts in her Answer to the SOR, including all of the 
delinquent student loans. (Answer, Tr. 9). She “disagreed” or denied the six medical 
debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant testified that SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.m were student loan 
debts accrued from the four-year period when she was unable to work. (Tr. 22) Her 
daughter was born with food allergies triggering seizures, requiring Applicant to stay 
home and care for the child. Her first husband was a low-paid teacher. (Tr. 23)  
 
Applicant testified that some of her delinquent student loans were federal and 
owed to the DOE. Others were state-subsidized loans owed to the state student loan 
agency. (Tr. 23) She claims that her DOE student loans have been rehabilitated and will 
be consolidated into one payment in June 2018. (Tr. 24) She has also reached out to 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel’s briefcase was sidetracked en route to the hearing. I left the record open for him to 
submit the GEs to Applicant, which had already been provided in discovery, and allow Applicant time to 
object to any or all of the GEs. She did not raise an objection.  
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 7, 2016 
SCA. (GE 1)  
 
 
3 
 
 
KHEAA to inquire about rehabilitation programs. She provided a post-hearing letter from 
the Department of the Treasury indicating that Applicant’s IRS tax refund was withheld 
in the amount of $2,294 to apply to her DOE delinquencies. (AE B). Otherwise, she 
hasn’t paid on her student loans for seven years. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant testified that when she left her husband in 2016, she had $30 in her 
bank account and she was earning very little. When she returned to the work force in 
2012, she was earning $250 every two weeks. (Tr. 25) She was unable to pay her bills. 
Now, she earns approximately $46,000 per year, and her new husband earns $20,000 
per year. (Tr. 27)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.o, 1.s, 1.t, and 1.u are delinquent medical debts in connection with 
her daughter’s health issues, that were placed for collection. Applicant testified that the 
child’s father is supposed to pay for half of these medical expenses, but he has not 
done so. (Tr. 29) He does send her $417 each month for child support. (Tr. 30) SOR ¶ 
1.n is an insurance debt that she contends should have been paid by her ex-husband. 
She claims she removed herself from the insurance policy when they split. (Tr. 30) 
Similarly, SOR ¶ 1.f was for cable television that should be paid by her ex-husband 
since he supposedly kept the cable boxes. (Tr. 32) Applicant “disagrees” with SOR ¶¶ 
1.q, 1.s, 1.t, and 1.u, but she has not reached out to the creditors or provided any 
evidence of dispute. All of her delinquent debts are listed in her credit reports.  
 
Applicant testified that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r is for a bank credit card she 
used, and she is working on a payment plan. (Tr. 34) She provided no documents to 
substantiate her payment plan. Applicant testified that SOR ¶¶ 1.v through 1.z all relate 
to delinquent debts or judgment (1.x), which she does not deny owing, but disputes with 
her ex-husband about who owes this debt. (Tr.36-38) She plans to satisfy all of her 
delinquent debts in the future. (Tr. 37) She provided post-hearing documents showing a 
payment made on March 28, 2018, in the amount of $149 on her federal student loans, 
and another one due on April 19, 2018 (AE A); and another document advising her to 
continue her $5 per month payments to the collection agency for DOE, but her payment 
plan expires June 4, 2018. (AE C) She also produced a student loan rehabilitation 
packet showing that due to her increased annual salary, her DOE monthly payments 
increased from $25 per month to $232 per month as of May 2018. (AE D)  
 
Applicant’s financial issues started when she was out of the work force for four 
years caring for her sick daughter. Her problems worsened when she left her ex-
husband and disputed with him many of their jointly held debts in 2016. Before that, she 
was diagnosed with a serious illness ten years ago. (Tr. 43) It is now in remission. 
Applicant has not had debt consolidation services or financial counseling. (Tr. 40) She 
does claim to have a budget, but it was not provided. Applicant stated her plan going 
forward is to address the larger delinquencies first and resolve those. She has not 
provided documentary evidence of a continuous stream of payments to establish a track 
record of repayments on any of her delinquent debts.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                               Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to most of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. All are 
supported by her credit reports. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
  (c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the  
 problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
 
6 
 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved, or entered into a payment plan to resolve any of the 
alleged delinquent debts except for the student loans. She testified about a 
rehabilitation plan and provided evidence that she entered into one during the month 
before her hearing. It is too soon to conclude that she is making a continuous stream of 
monthly payments in the amount of $232. She failed to take action on these delinquent 
student loans for over seven years. Applicant’s eleventh hour efforts to enter into a 
student loan rehabilitation plan are too little, too late. 
 
 Applicant had compelling family and economic circumstances that explained 
some of her financial problems, including her ex-husband’s low paying job, and caring 
for her daughter. These were factors beyond her control. She has since done little to 
contact creditors and to make payment arrangements. She disputes many of these just 
debts with her ex-husband, but acknowledges this is a private dispute. She repeatedly 
expressed her intent to resolve her debts at some future date. She has not followed 
through with a demonstrated track record of consistent payments pursuant to 
installment plans with her creditors. She has demonstrated no viable plan going 
forward. Applicant has not acted responsibly. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. I am not satisfied that her delinquent debts are being resolved.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are no indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. They are longstanding, going back 
over a decade, and continuing. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.aa:             Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
