1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No.: 17-02078 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
May 4, 2018 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised by his 
property in Afghanistan, and family members who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
History of Case 
On December 14, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 4, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 3, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 23, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on October 24, 2017, setting the hearing for November 1, 2017. 
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) II.)1 At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence. They were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibit 
(AE) A into evidence. AE A was admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to leave the record open until December 1, 2017, to permit submission of 
additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 14, 2017. 
Applicant submitted post-hearing documents on November 5, 2017. His post-hearing 
documents were marked AE B, and admitted without objection. The record closed as 
scheduled. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Afghanistan. Those facts are set 
forth in the following: Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Afghanistan, 
marked as HE III. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general 
knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c.  He denied SOR 
allegations 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. His admissions are incorporated into the following facts: 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He is married to a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has 
three daughters, who are naturalized U.S. citizens. His son is a natural-born U.S. 
citizen. Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He attended undergraduate school in 
Afghanistan and earned a bachelor’s degree there. He immigrated to the United States 
in 2009, under a special immigrant visa, which he qualified for due to his support of the 
U.S. military forces as a linguist for four years. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen on 
August 7, 2014. He seeks a security clearance in connection with his work as a linguist. 
(GE 1; AE A; Tr. 27-32.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased, as are two of his brothers. (Tr. 36.) He has 
three sisters and one brother who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His 
youngest sister is a homemaker. Applicant speaks to her by internet phone twice per 
year on holidays. He last saw her in 2009. Her husband works in a garment store. 
Applicant’s middle sister and oldest sister are also homemakers. Their husbands are 
deceased. Applicant speaks to them approximately twice per year, by internet phone. 
Applicant’s brother is a former employee of the Afghan Ministry of Commerce, where he 
                                                 
1 HE I is a copy of a letter by Department Counsel to Applicant, forwarding GE 1-2 and the Administrative 
Notice materials. 
 
 
3 
 
 
worked in the tech sector. He retired due to health problems. Applicant contacts him two 
to three times per year. Applicant sent his siblings approximately $2,000 in support, 
prior to 2014. However, he has no intention to provide them support in the future. 
(Answer; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 36-46, 67-70.)  
 
 Applicant’s nephew, alleged to be a citizen and resident of Afghanistan employed 
by the Afghan government, immigrated to the United States approximately two years 
ago. He formerly worked as a communications specialist for the Afghan government, 
but is now employed as a graphic designer. He has legal permanent resident status in 
the United States. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 45-46, 51-52, 70.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has three brothers and two sisters. Her parents are deceased. 
Her three brothers and one sister are Afghan citizens residing in Germany. She has one 
sister who is a citizen and resident in Afghanistan, but is not employed. That sister has 
been diagnosed with breast cancer and is ill. They communicate on a weekly basis and 
Applicant’s wife sends her financial support. Another sister, who lived in Afghanistan 
and was a government employee, passed away in 2013. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 59-
66, 77.) 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in Afghanistan in approximately 2007. It is 
approximately 200 square meters and construction has not been completed. He paid 
approximately “200,000 Afghanis.” He estimated that it is worth $14,000 dollars. He 
intends to sell it. He has no other assets in Afghanistan. (GE 1; Answer; Tr. 52-57, 75.) 
Applicant does not maintain contact with anyone else in Afghanistan, other than 
professional U.S. military contacts necessary for his job. (Answer; Tr. 65.)  
 
 Applicant recently purchased a home in the United States. It is valued at 
approximately $325,000. (Tr. 57.) He only put down one percent of the purchase price. 
(Tr. 58.) He owns two vehicles, but has no other assets in the United States. (Tr. 76.)  
 
 Applicant is considered an “outstanding instructor” and has provided “invaluable 
help” to his U.S. Army colleagues. A unit commanding officer indicated Applicant “is 
highly competent, articulate, disciplined, experienced, and one of the best interpreters I 
have observed in over 18 years of service.” (AE B.) He has been awarded numerous 
certificates of appreciation for his service as a linguist. (AE B.)  
   
 The U.S. Department of State has issued a travel warning with respect to 
Afghanistan. It notes that travel to all areas of Afghanistan is unsafe due to the ongoing 
risk of kidnapping, hostage taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, 
suicide bombings, and insurgent attacks. Attacks may target official Afghan and U.S. 
governmental convoys and compounds. Extremists associated with Taliban networks, 
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, are active throughout Afghanistan. 
Widespread human rights abuses are reported. (HE III.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
(Line space inserted) 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
  Applicant has connections to his sisters and brother, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan.2 His nephew is an Afghan citizen, residing in the United 
                                                 
2 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged Applicant had a sister-in-law who was a citizen and resident in Afghanistan, and was 
employed by the Afghan government. That sister-in–law is deceased. Applicant’s surviving sister-in-law in 
Afghanistan was not alleged in the SOR, and is not considered for disqualifying purposes. However, she 
may be considered under the mitigating conditions or whole-person analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
 
States. Additionally, Applicant owns a $14,000 property in Afghanistan. There is an 
articulated heightened risk associated with having ties to family members and property 
in Afghanistan, due to the activities of terrorist organizations and insurgents operating 
within its borders. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions were established in this instance. The 
potential for a conflict of interest is present due to Applicant’s ongoing and significant 
ties to his family and property in Afghanistan. While he generally contacts his siblings 
only twice a year, his wife maintains close contact with her sister, communicating with 
her weekly and sending money frequently. He has little equity in his recently purchased 
U.S. home, and its values appears to be outweighed by the value of his $14,000 
property in Afghanistan. He failed to demonstrate deep and longstanding relationships 
or loyalties in the United States. While he is credited for his years of service to U.S. 
 
 
7 
 
 
military units as an Afghan linguist, the record contains little information on assets, or 
other deep and longstanding connections to the United States. Without more 
information, it cannot be determined that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the U.S. interest, or would not be subject to heightened risk of foreign 
influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant 
served honorably supporting U.S. military units as an Afghan linguist. However, the 
record lacks sufficient information to support a finding that he would resolve any 
conflicts of interest in favor of the United States. His Afghan family and property 
interests create ongoing heightened potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
