 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ADP Case No. 17-03926 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
   For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On November 30, 2017, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued to her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
signed on December 21, 2017, and in an email dated January 3, 2018, she admitted the 
sole allegation raised and requested a determination based on the written record. On 
January 31, 2018, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with eight 
attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. Based on my 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old health technician seeking a position with a defense 
contractor. She has earned a high school diploma and completed at least a semester of 
community college. She is single and has no children.  
 
 Applicant first acquired a certain credit card in 2000 and always made “steady 
payments” on the account. (SOR Response) In 2005, she used the card to purchase a 
vehicle, which led her to a monthly obligation of $150 a month. This was a manageable 
sum that she timely honored on a regular basis. In about 2009, however, her monthly 
minimum payments were raised to approximately $275, a sum she could not afford. 
Working with the credit card company, she was put on a special payment plan for one 
year, where she timely paid $125 a month. However, in 2011, one payment arrived late. 
The credit card company reinstituted its former requirement of about $275 a month. 
With no increase in income, the ability to meet this monthly obligation remained elusive. 
 
 In March 2012, the credit card company prevailed in a judgment against 
Applicant for $17,000. The first law firm to handle collections on the debt was initially 
willing to accept monthly payments of $25. Applicant adjusted her budget accordingly. 
Eventually, however, it demanded $100 a month, which Applicant could no longer 
afford. The collection effort was then transferred to another law firm, which demanded 
monthly payments of $200. Applicant explained her situation to no avail. When she 
failed to meet the $200 monthly payment, the new law firm sought to freeze Applicant’s 
bank account and garnish her wages.   
 
In July 2016, Applicant met with an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in relation to this process. She discussed this situation, providing 
proof of the payments she had been making to the law firm. She explained the matter 
as best she could. At the time, her net monthly income was approximately $2,600. Her 
rent, payment on the credit card at issue, a second credit card in good standing, car 
insurance, gasoline, utilities, cable bill, groceries, tithing, and entertainment amounted 
to about $2,395, while her monthly cell phone charge and student loan payments 
amounted to another $162.2 Consequently, she had insufficient funds to meet the ever-
increasing demands for higher minimum payments or financially survive garnishment of 
the sums contemplated by the law firm. 
 
Feeling she had no other options, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in February 2017. As a prerequisite to filing for bankruptcy, Applicant 
received financial counseling.3 Her bankruptcy was discharged in May 2017. The sum 
at issue was approximately $22,000, although Applicant only recalls the credit card as 
                                                          
2 The student loans have since been deferred. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
3 See, e.g., https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/ust/legacy/2011/07/13/FTC Consumer AlertCC.pdf . 
 
 
 
 
3 
being at issue.4  (FORM, Item 8, at 6) Now free of the obligation related to that credit 
card and related collection effort, and with her student loan now in deferral, Applicant’s 
“current financial status is that her bills are being paid on time and [she] does not have 
any other financial issues.”5 (FORM, Item 8, at 4) She presently has assets of about 
$10,500. Her most recent credit report reflects no delinquent accounts, other than 
references to the adverse judgment by the credit card company and the bankruptcy 
action discussed here. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to protected information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to protected information will be 
resolved in favor of the national interest. In reaching this decision, I have only drawn 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence provided.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person seeking eligibility for a trustworthiness position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard protected information. Such 
                                                          
4 Applicant most recent credit report reflects that two other accounts were included in the bankruptcy 
petition, one of which was a student loan account that could not be discharged through bankruptcy. 
Elsewhere, that student loan account is noted as deferred. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
5 Elsewhere, it was noted: “[Her] financial status since this bankruptcy is good as [she] is paying her bills 
on-time.” (FORM, Item 8, at 7) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned. 
  
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the trustworthiness concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant filed 
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2017, which was discharged in May 2017. She 
sought bankruptcy protection after becoming substantially delinquent on a credit card 
used to buy a car. This is sufficient to apply financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Under these facts, the following conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-
related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
           From the day she first acquired the credit card at issue in 2000, Applicant made 
timely payments on the account. After Applicant purchased a vehicle with her credit 
card in 2005, she continued to make regular and timely payments of $150 for a number 
of years. About four years later, the credit card company raised the minimum payment 
to $275, a sum beyond her budget. From there, she struggled to work with the company 
as its collection entity made ever-increasing demands. The demands included minimum 
monthly payments of up to $200, and threats to impose garnishment and freeze her 
bank account. Fearing such action would prohibit her from meeting any obligations, and 
unable to negotiate an alternative solution to the lawyers most recent demands, she 
completed financial counseling and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
           Today, Applicant is living within her means and making timely payments on her 
bills. Her income has been increased not just by the discharge of her credit card debt, 
but with her student loans transferred into deferment status. While bankruptcy is not the 
perfect method for addressing one’s delinquent obligation, and is not considered a 
good-faith solution to debt resolution, Applicant’s situation with this particular credit card 
was something of an aberration, given her past history of timely payments. It was the 
main reason she resorted to filing for bankruptcy protection. Throughout the time the 
terms on the credit card payments became more onerous, Applicant tried to work with 
the credit card company, then with its lawyers. Today, she is living within her means 
and honoring her monthly obligation in a timely manner. Given these facts, AG ¶ 20(a)-
(c) apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under the AG, the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old woman seeking a position with a defense contractor. 
She has earned a high school diploma and completed at least a semester of community 
college. She is single and has no children.  
 
Although Applicant handled her credit card payments responsibly for several 
years, Applicant’s credit card company nearly doubled the minimum payment owed. 
This increase was unmanageable given her limited income. She worked with the 
company and its collection entities until they ceased taking any action but increasing 
 
 
 
 
6 
their terms. Left with no other alternatives to address the account and preserve her 
ability to meet her other obligations, she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
 
Today, Applicant is living within her means and making timely payments on her 
regular obligations. Her available income has increased with the elimination of the credit 
card payments and the deferment of her student loan. Now with a fresh start, Applicant 
is in a good position for reformulating her personal finances and avoiding similar 
problems in the future. Consequently, I find Applicant has mitigated financial 
considerations trustworthiness. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive 
information. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
