 
 
 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 17-02843 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to file Federal and state income tax returns and 
resolving tax liens. He did not refute or mitigate the resulting financial security concerns. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on November 17, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On January 11, 2018, the Defense 
 
 
 
 
2 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On January 22, 2018, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for February 7, 2018. The case was 
heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 
into evidence. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) 
A into evidence.1 All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 15, 2018. The record remained open until March 2, 
2018, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. No other exhibits 
were submitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. with explanations.  
 
 Applicant is 62 years old and has been married for over 35 years. He and his wife 
have two adult children. He worked for a Federal agency from 2000 to approximately 
2012, where he held a security clearance. He started a position with a defense contractor 
after leaving his prior employment in 2012. (Tr. 20-22)  
 
 In June 2012 and April 2015, Applicant submitted security clearance applications 
(SCA). In them, he disclosed that he failed to file Federal and state tax returns for 2013 
and 2014, and that Federal tax liens were filed against him in 2008 and 2009. (GE 1, GE 
5) In September 26, 2017 interrogatories, he admitted that he had not filed Federal and 
state income tax returns for years 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. (GE 2)  
 
 Applicant’s tax problems started in 2001 when he began a business and withdrew 
$63,000 from his 401(k) to support the business. He subsequently lost the business and 
incurred a Federal tax penalty for the monies he withdrew. (Tr. 28-30; GE 2) The Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) filed a $63,341 tax lien in June 2005. The lien was paid in 
December 2009. (GE 4) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant reiterated that he has not filed his returns for 2013, 2014, 
2015, and 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He attributed this problem to past marital disagreements he 
had with his wife which started in 2013. He and his wife subsequently separated in 2014 
and reconciled in 2015. He said he has given a tax preparer all of the pertinent 
information, who is preparing the returns. (Tr. 24-26, 33)  
 
 In December 2008, the IRS filed a $37,151 tax lien against Applicant (SOR ¶ 1. c). 
Applicant said he was making monthly payments on this debt, which he thought included 
multiple tax years. (Tr. 31) During an investigative interview in June 2017, Applicant said 
he had been making monthly payments of $1,220 to the IRS on the debt. He said he owes 
about $14,000 on the debt. (GE 2) He provided proof that he made those payments in 
                                            
1After reviewing and admitting AE A into evidence, Applicant indicated that he did not have an extra 
copy of this 2017 Tax Release. He requested permission to email it to me and Department Counsel after 
the hearing. (Tr. 15) Although the record remained open until March 2, 2018, he never provided a hard 
copy of the exhibit for the record. 
 
 
 
 
3 
April, May, June, July, and October 2017. (Answer) He did not provide a current transcript 
from the IRS confirming the status of that tax lien or the tax years that are being paid.  
 
 In August 2009, the IRS filed an $11,346 tax lien against Applicant (SOR ¶ 1. b). 
This lien was for tax years 2004 and 2007. It was released in December 2017. (Tr. 30-
31; AE A) 
 
 Applicant earns $71,000 annually. He said his wife earns about the same amount 
or more. He has not taken credit or financial counseling, but is working with his tax 
preparer to resolve his financial issues. (Tr. 27-28) He did not submit a budget.  
 
 One witness testified for Applicant. He has known Applicant for over 30 years as 
a friend. He said Applicant is an honest person and a good father. (Tr. 16-18) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
 
 
 
4 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused by or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 sets out disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Four are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of unwillingness to file Federal and state income tax 
returns, beginning in 2013 and continuing through 2016. He also failed to timely pay 
Federal income taxes that resulted in two tax liens, one of which is not resolved. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out five conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant has not filed Federal and state income tax returns from 2013 through 
2016. His failure to do so casts doubt on his judgment. He also has an outstanding 
Federal tax lien that was filed in 2008. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant did not 
provide a good explanation for failing to timely file four years of tax returns or regarding 
his inability to responsibly manage tax liabilities. His tax problems have been within his 
control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant has not participated in credit or financial 
counseling, although he said he discussed his finances with his tax preparer. There is no 
evidence that his unfiled tax returns or the 2008 tax lien are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
In December 2017, Applicant resolved an outstanding tax lien for unpaid Federal 
taxes for 2004 and 2007. Waiting over ten years to resolve those two tax debts does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to responsibly manage one’s legal obligations.  AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not provide mitigation. Applicant has not submitted sufficient evidence to document 
his repayment plan with the IRS for the 2008 tax lien and a record of complying with it. 
AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply to that lien. He did present evidence that he finished making 
payments to the IRS on his 2009 tax lien. AG ¶ 20(g) provides some mitigation for that 
allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security eligibility 
must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is an intelligent and articulate 62-year-old man, who has been working 
for his current employer since 2012 and worked for a Federal agency prior to that. During 
his hearing, he discussed his history of unfiled and unpaid taxes. He recognized his 
responsibility to resolve those issues, but has not done so. At this time, he has not 
established a record of responsibly following tax laws and managing related financial 
obligations. His actions are not sufficient to outweigh a long history of non-compliance 
with a fundamental legal obligation to file and pay taxes, beginning in 2001 when he 
withdrew monies from his 401(k). The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).2  
   
                                            
2 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
 
 
 
7 
The record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s judgment and 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                            
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
