
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
August 8, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on August 14, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely submitted a eight-
page response to the FORM (Response), on September 12, 2017, which I marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant did not object to the Government’s Items1 and the 
Government did not object to AE A. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5; AE A is admitted into evidence. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me on December 18, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and a high school graduate. He earned an associate’s 
degree in 1975. He is married. They have three adult children. He started working for a 
defense contractor in February 2013. (GE 2; GE 3; AE A.) 
 
 On June 17, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it, he disclosed delinquent debts and attributed them to underemployment and 
unemployment since 2007. (GE 3.) In 2010, he voluntarily took a 25% pay cut as a result 
of a business down turn with his employer. However, the company was unable to 
financially recover, and Applicant was laid off in 2011. He was unemployed until February 
2013, although he worked part-time jobs when work was available during that time. (GE 
2; GE 3; AE A.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from August 2016 and May 2017, the SOR 
alleged five debts that became delinquent between 2011 and 2016, and totaled $32,554. 
(GE 4; GE 5.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant was indebted on a $19,180 debt owed to a credit union. 
Applicant claimed, “This debt has been charged off and probably taken as a business 
loss. The company has stopped trying to recover this debt.” (AE A.) However, without 
further documentation, such as an IRS Form 1099-C confirming that the debt was 
cancelled and subject to taxes, the debt remains unresolved. Applicant has been aware 
of this debt since at least 2011.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate 
amount of $5,550. Applicant claimed he received an IRS Form 1099-C confirming that 
the debt was cancelled and subject to taxes. However he failed to provide documentation 
                                                 
1 AE A contains a four page addendum to Applicant’s personal subject interview contained in GE3, in 
addition to four pages of explanation regarding Applicant’s debts. GE 3 is admitted with the clarifications 
offered in AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
to support his claim. The debt remains unresolved. Applicant has been aware of this debt 
since at least 2011. (AE A.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: Applicant was indebted on a medical debt in the approximate amount 
of $196. Applicant claimed, “I am making payments on this debt.” (AE A.) However, he 
provided no documentation to support his claim. It has been delinquent since at least 
2014. This debt is unresolved. (GE 4; GE 5; AE A.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: Applicant was indebted on a medical debt in the approximate amount 
of $66. Applicant claimed, “This [d]ebt has been paid in full.” (AE A.) However, he provided 
no documentation to support his claim. It has been delinquent since 2013. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 4; GE 5; AE A.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: Applicant was indebted to a bank on a collection account in the amount 
of $7,562. Applicant claimed, “This debt has been charged off and probably taken as a 
business loss. The company stopped trying to recover this debt.” (AE A.) However, he 
provided no documentation to support his claim. It has been delinquent since at least 
2016. This debt is unresolved. (GE 4; AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2011 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under 
the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not show that any of the above mitigating conditions fully apply 
to Applicant. Applicant has a long history of not meeting his financial obligations. While 
he attributed his debts to his underemployment and unemployment, he has largely 
ignored his delinquencies since 2011. He did not establish a track record addressing his 
remaining financial obligations. He was given ample opportunity to document his claims, 
but failed to do so. It is likely that Applicant will continue to experience financial difficulties. 
He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the Government’s concerns under the foregoing 
conditions. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has successfully 
worked for a defense contractor since 2013. While he attributed his delinquent debts to 
circumstances that were partially beyond his control, including his unemployment and 
underemployment, he has not exhibited responsible financial conduct since that time. 
Applicant’s financial irresponsibility has been recent, voluntary, and occurred when he 
was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not demonstrated, nor was likelihood that similar 
delinquencies would not recur. Overall, the evidence creates doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
  
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN 
Administrative Judge 
