1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           ------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 17-03614 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
05/24/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate security concern raised by his 
problematic financial history. He did, however, mitigate the security concern raised by his 
personal conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on April 22, 2016. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On December 12, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
2 
 
the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
and Guideline E for personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on January 31, 2018, 
and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On February 20, 2018, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on February 21, 2018. He was given thirty 
days to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on March 9, 2018. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were eight items of evidence, that are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 and are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old and a high school graduate. He is divorced with two 
daughters ages 18 and 20. Since March 2015, he has been employed by a defense 
contractor.3   
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant has 14 delinquent debts totaling 
about $16,325.4 Applicant admitted all of those debts but corrected some of the balances. 
For all but one of the debts, Applicant answered that they would be paid by the end of 
December 2018.5 He did not, however, submit any documentation supporting that claim 
or showing any payments towards resolving any of the debts.  
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
the SOR debts in his security clearance application. He claimed in his background 
interview that his failure to disclose them was due to an “oversight.”6 And, in that interview 
he did not dispute any of the debts. In his SOR answer, he stated that his negative reply 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, 
which documents are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 GE 4.  
 
4 GE 1.  
 
5 GE 3. For SOR ⁋ 1.n ($322), he claimed that it was paid on August 12, 2016. The record supports 
Applicant’s claim. GE 8, p. 3.    
 
6 GE 5.  
 
3 
 
was a “mistake.”7 This appears to be Applicant’s first experience with the security 
clearance process.8 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.11 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.12 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.13 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.14 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.15 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.16 
 
                                                          
7 GE 3.  
 
8 GE 4.  
 
9 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
14 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
4 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
     Discussion 
  
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,19 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.20 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
19 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
20 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Facts admitted by an applicant in an answer to a SOR require no further proof by 
the Government.21 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a 
problematic financial history, as alleged. This raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
(b), and (c).  The next inquiry is whether any potentially mitigating conditions apply. 
 
  Applicant has not submitted any documents establishing that he has paid or 
otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. The Board has previously noted that it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.22 On this record, I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
 In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances.23 Under Guideline E for 
personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.”24 A statement is false or dishonest when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate 
if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the information, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 In this case, the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his security clearance 
application by deliberately failing to disclose the indebtedness alleged under Guideline F. 
Applicant claimed in his background interview that his failure to disclose his debts was 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR 
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 
(App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal 
basis for an Administrative Judge’s findings”). 
 
22 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-17520 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 20, 2007). 
 
23 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9) (explaining the “whole-person” concept and factors).  
 
24 AG ¶ 15.   
 
6 
 
due to an “oversight.” In his Answer to the SOR, he pleaded that his failure was a 
“mistake.” In addition, this is apparently Applicant’s first trip through the security clearance 
process. On this record, I conclude that Applicant’s omission of his debts on the security 
clearance application was not deliberate.  
 
  The evidence on Applicant’s financial condition raises doubts about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due 
consideration to the whole-person concept.25 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant has 
not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:                   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:       For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
  
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
25 See note 23, supra.  
 
