 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02922 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 8, 2016. 
On September 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 28, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 29, 2017. On December 1, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
 2
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on December 11, 2017, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, a 
cover letter with 17 exhibits, which was admitted without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on April 13, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i. 
He denied SOR ¶ 1.j. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old graphic artist employed by a defense contractor since 
May 2013. He has held a top secret clearance and eligibility for access to sensitive 
compartmented information in the past, and he currently holds a secret clearance. For 
the past three years, he has received outstanding performance reviews (“frequently 
exceeds expectations” in 2014 and 2015; “far exceeds expectations” in 2016). (AX A, 
Exhibit 16.) 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from June 1993 to January 
2003, and in the Air Force Reserve from January 2003 to December 2010, when he was 
medically retired. He has worked as a graphic artist for most of his career, with federal 
contractors from May 2004 to January 2011, and in private-sector jobs from February 
2012 to May 2013.  
 
 Applicant married in 1995 and divorced in 2007. He remarried in 2008 and divorced 
in 2011. (Answer to SOR at 3.) He has lived with a cohabitant since June 2012. He has 
a 16-year-old son from his first marriage. 
 
 In April 2008, an investigator from the state child protective services determined 
that Applicant’s son had been physically and emotionally abused and injured when his 
stepfather (2nd husband of Applicant’s first wife) disciplined him. The record reflects that 
the stepfather also accessed child pornography on the family computer and was arrested 
for solicitation of prostitution. A juvenile court judge gave Applicant temporary custody of 
his son. (AX A, Exhibit 1.) In January 2010, Applicant and his first wife were given shared 
custody of their son. Applicant’s ex-wife was held in contempt on several occasions for 
depriving Applicant of visitation and attempting to remove their son from the state without 
court permission. (AX A, Exhibit 8.). In August 2013, Applicant’s ex-wife relinquished 
custody because of her medical and financial problems.  
 
In November 2013, Appellant arranged for a psychiatric examination of his son 
because of behavioral problems at home and at school. His son was diagnosed with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autistic spectrum disorder. (AX A, Exhibit 11 at 
3.). In June 2014, a licensed clinical psychologist made the same diagnosis. (AX A, 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
Exhibit 11 at 5-6.) Applicant incurred about $650 in uninsured medical expenses for these 
services. (Response to FORM.)  
 
In May 2014, Applicant sought sole custody of his son and a “protection from 
abuse” order after his son reported additional instances of physical abuse by his 
stepfather. (AX A, Exhibits 5 and 6.) In September 2017, a family court judge ruled that 
his son was of sufficient age to decide which parent he preferred to live with during the 
school year. (AX A, Exhibit 10.) Applicant incurred about $9,500 in legal fees during this 
litigation. (Response to FORM.) Applicant’s son has lived with him since 2013, but has 
regularly visited his mother, who resides in another state. 
 
 The SOR alleged ten delinquent debts totaling about $160,612, the largest of 
which are student loans placed for collection of about $102,073 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a child-
support arrearage of about $50,079 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The debts are reflected in Applicant’s 
SCA and credit reports from November 2016 and August 2017. The evidence concerning 
the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶1.a: student loans placed for collection of about $102,073. Applicant 
disclosed delinquent student loans in his SCA. (FORM Item 3 at 38.) In his answer to the 
SOR, he stated that the loans became delinquent because his level of income and the 
cost of litigating custody of his son made him unable to make the payments. A November 
2016 credit report reflected that he was making monthly $5 payments on several 
delinquent student loans that had been referred for collection in October 2016. (FORM 
Item 4.) These payments apparently were pursuant to a rehabilitation program that was 
not successful. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he had contacted the 
collection agency but had not yet made any payments, payment agreements, or 
arrangements to rehabilitate the loans. He did not report any further progress on resolving 
these debts in his response to the FORM. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: child-support arrearage placed for collection of about $50,079. 
Applicant admitted this debt in his answer to the SOR but disputed the amount. He 
attributes the excessive amount to vindictive actions by his first ex-wife to avenge his 
efforts to gain custody of their son. His claim of vindictiveness is supported by a printout 
of a contentious text-message exchange between them. (SOR Answer, Exhibit 1.b.) 
Applicant has had custody of his son since at least August 2013, and his November 2016 
credit report reflects no arrearage and states that the account in the jurisdiction where his 
son was born was current as of June 2015. (FORM Item 4 at 10.) However, his August 
2017 credit report reflects that the child-support account in the jurisdiction where 
Applicant and his son now reside was opened in January 2016 and is past due for 
$50,079. (FORM Item 5 at 2.) In his SCA, Applicant stated that he is making weekly 
payments on the arrearage by payroll deduction. (FORM Item 3 at 37.) Department 
Counsel conceded that Applicant’s pay had been garnished for $20,740 in July 2016, 
even though there are no documents in the FORM reflecting the garnishment. 
(Department Counsel’s submission at 2.) In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated 
that 40% of his income is deducted for child support and the arrearage, and that he 
 
 4
intended to hire an attorney and contest the amount of the arrearage. The dispute about 
the amount of the arrearage has not been resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: deficiency of $2,441 after repossession of a vehicle. The deficiency 
was assessed in April 2008 and referred for collection in March 2011. Applicant stated in 
his answer that the debt was resolved in 2012, but he provided no documentation to 
reflect resolution of the debt. It is still reflected in the November 2016 and August 2017 
credit reports. (FORM Item 4 at 8 and Item 5 at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: educational debt for $1,396. Applicant attended college from January 
2012 to June 2013. He did not receive a degree, but he incurred this debt, which is not 
resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i: credit-union overdraft, charged off for $847; 
department-store charge account, charged off for $462; telecommunications debt, 
placed for collection of $1,796; and cable-service debt, placed for collection of 
$783. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he attributed all of these debts to his second ex-
wife’s actions on joint accounts. He submitted no evidence of actions to resolve them. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: educational debt for $299, placed for collection. Applicant attended 
a community college from January 2015 to May 2015, did not receive a degree, and 
incurred this debt, which is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: auto insurance premium placed for collection of $436. Applicant 
denied this debt in his answer to the SOR, and stated that he had disputed it. He 
submitted no evidence of a dispute or its resolution. However, he submitted evidence that 
he is a current customer in good standing. (SOR Answer, Exhibit 1.j.) 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that his jobs before May 2013 paid 
only about one-third of his current income, making it difficult to pay his living expenses. 
He provided no specific information about his income or expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
 5
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his 
security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 6
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to 
satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. Applicant’s debts are numerous and recent, but 
his inability to pay them is due in part to the expenses of litigating the custody of his son, 
which are unlikely to recur. However, Applicant has provided insufficient information to 
determine the impact of his legal expenses on his overall financial situation. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s two divorces, the abuse of his son 
by his first ex-wife’s husband, Applicant’s legal difficulties in gaining custody of his son, 
 
 7
and the emotional and financial stress of litigation were circumstances beyond his control. 
However, he has not acted responsibly toward his student loans. He submitted no 
evidence of contacts with the collection agency or progress in negotiating a resolution of 
the debts. He claimed that he resolved the repossession deficiency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
but he submitted no documentary evidence to support his claim. He acknowledged that 
he was responsible for the joint debts incurred by his second ex-wife, but he has taken 
no action to resolve them. He has taken no action to resolve the educational debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant provided no documentary evidence to 
support his claim that the repossession deficiency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was resolved. He 
has not made any payments or established payment plans for the other debts alleged in 
the SOR, except for the insurance debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j, which appears to be 
resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the amount of the child-support arrearage alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. Department Counsel conceded that $20,740 of the debt is being collected by 
garnishment, and Applicant has disputed the remainder of the arrearage. The 
discrepancies between the two credit reports in the record and the evidence that Applicant 
has had physical custody of his son since at least August 2013 establishes the basis for 
a legitimate dispute of the amount of the arrearage.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without 
a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his sincerity based on demeanor or to question 
him about his financial situation. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 
2003). The evidence in the record establishes that Applicant has been through an 
emotionally and financially stressful period, but it does not justify his lack of contact with 
his creditors or efforts to resolve his debts. Individuals entrusted with classified 
information are expected to act responsibly, even under stressful situations. “Once a 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 8
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). 
 
 A security-clearance adjudication is not a one-time event. If Applicant takes timely 
and responsible actions to resolve his delinquent debts, he may well qualify for 
reinstatement of his security clearance at some time in the future. See Directive ¶ E3,1,37 
through E3.1.41 (reconsideration authorized after one year). However, on the record 
before me, I am compelled to resolve this case in favor of national security. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
