 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03209 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 28, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on December 21, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on January 8, 2018. He responded on February 8, 2018, with 
documentation I have marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. I admitted the 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 8 and AE A in evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j. He is 59 years old, married, and he has two 
adult children and one adult stepchild. He obtained his high school diploma in 1977, a 
bachelor’s degree in 1986, and a master’s degree in 2011. He has worked as an 
engineer for a defense contractor since 1981. He has held a security clearance since 
1988. He has owned his home since 2000.1  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax year 2015, as required (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j). It alleges that he owed 
$6,500 in delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.k). It alleges that his 
wages were garnished in July 2017 for a $4,196 judgment, and the garnishment order 
was still in effect as of the date of the SOR (SOR ¶ 1.h). Finally, it alleges four 
delinquent consumer accounts for $28,761 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c and 1.g) and three 
delinquent medical accounts for $6,206 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f).  
 
 The July 2016 credit report verifies all of Applicant’s delinquent debts. Only SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.c are listed in the July 2017 credit report, and only SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b 
are listed in the December 2017 credit report. Applicant also listed and discussed his 
failure to file his income tax returns and his delinquent debts in his June 2016 security 
clearance application (SCA) and during his October 2016 background interview. The 
wage garnishment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is also established by a July 2017 incident 
history report printed from the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) database.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to being a single-income household 
since the birth of their youngest child in 1993, as his wife’s chronic medical issues 
prevented her from working. Her condition was compounded after she sustained injuries 
in a multi-car accident in 2010, and only some of her medical expenses were covered 
by insurance. At a date not in the record, Applicant paid a settlement for a minor car 
accident involving one of his children, as the expense was not covered by insurance. 
Applicant obtained loans, refinanced his home, and used credit cards to pay for 
household expenses and assist his two children with their college expenses. He 
attributed his failure to timely file his 2015 federal and state income tax returns to his 
pending receipt from the IRS of an electronic filing PIN for his spouse, as discussed 
below. Finally, he attributed his delinquent taxes for 2009 to taxes not being withheld 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3, 4, 9; AE A. 
 
2 Items 1, 4-9. 
 
 
3 
 
from his wife’s wages when she provided in-home health care for her father, also as 
discussed below.3  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.a is for a $16,608 charged-off debt to a federal credit union. Applicant’s 
credit union extended him a line of credit that he used towards his spouse’s medical 
bills, his children’s college expenses, and daily living expenses. He made payments in 
the past to keep the account active. When he was no longer able to make payments, 
the account was charged off. Though he continued to bank with the credit union as of 
the date of his Answer, he acknowledged that he had not taken any action to resolve 
the account.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b is for a $4,149 credit card placed in collection. Applicant indicated in 
his SCA and background interview that this as an old, unsecured debt that he listed in 
his 1990 bankruptcy. He stated in his Answer that he was working on settling it. In 
October 2016, he entered into a payment plan to resolve this debt. The plan provided 
for payments of $100 monthly from October 2017 to February 2018, followed by 37 
additional payments totaling $3,648. He did not provide documentation to show that he 
made any payments in accordance with the plan.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is for a $1,974 charged-off store credit card. SOR ¶ 1.h is for the 
garnishment of Applicant’s wages in July 2017 for a $4,196 judgment brought against 
him by the same creditor as SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant indicated in his SCA that he used this 
credit card for household expenses and he acknowledged that he paid it through the 
garnishment of his wages. In his Answer, he stated that he settled this account before 
the enforcement of the garnishment order. While the JPAS incident history report 
reflects that his wages were set to be garnished in July 2017, Applicant provided 
documentation to show that the garnishment order was terminated in March 2017, prior 
to the issuance of the SOR.6 
                                                                                                                                                                  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are for delinquent medical debts totaling $6,206. In his 
SCA and Answer, Applicant stated that he disputed SOR ¶ 1.d, which was for his wife’s 
emergency room bill, because it should have been covered by his medical insurance. 
He did not provide documentation to show that he disputed this debt or that it was 
otherwise resolved. Though he denied in his Answer that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 
1.f were his, he also listed both of them in his SCA and stated that he was also 
disputing them because they were for his wife’s emergency room bills that should have 
been covered by his medical insurance. He did not provide documentation to support 
his claim.7 
 
                                                          
3 Items 3, 4, 9. 
 
4 Items 3, 4. 
 
5 Items 3, 4, 9; AE A. 
 
6 Items 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9; AE A. 
 
7 Items 3, 4, 9. 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g is for a $6,030 account placed in collection. Applicant stated in his 
SCA and Answer that he disputed this debt because he believed he listed it in his prior 
bankruptcy, or it was for medical expenses that were supposed to be covered by his 
medical insurance. However, he stated in his background interview that he was in the 
process of repaying it and he did not think it was listed in his prior bankruptcy. He did 
not provide documentation to show that he disputed this debt, or that it was otherwise 
resolved.8 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j allege that Applicant failed to file, as required, his 2015 federal 
and state income tax returns. While Applicant denied such failure in his Answer, he 
acknowledged it in his SCA. He attributed his failure to do so to his pending receipt from 
the IRS of an electronic filing PIN for his spouse, who is legally blind and unable to read. 
Upon receipt of the PIN, he expected to file and pay his outstanding 2015 taxes. In his 
background interview, he stated that the PIN he received did not work so he expected to 
file his 2015 income tax returns by paper and have his spouse’s signature notarized. He 
also expected that he would owe $800, and he intended to pay it simultaneously with 
his filing.9  
 
 Applicant provided an unsigned copy of a self-prepared 2015 federal and state 
income tax return, reflecting that he owed the IRS $872 and was due a $2,293 state 
refund. An IRS Form 1040-V Payment Voucher for the $872 balance was attached to 
the return. He did not provide documentation to show that he filed the return or paid the 
outstanding balance. Applicant also admitted in his Answer that he untimely filed his 
2016 federal and state taxes in July 2017, for which he expected a federal refund of 
$1,055 and a state refund of $2,093.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k alleges that Applicant owed $6,500 in delinquent federal taxes for tax 
year 2009. He admitted in his Answer that he had unpaid federal taxes for tax years 
2009 as well as 2010. For tax year 2009, he stated in his background interview that he 
owed $6,500 after the IRS discovered that his wife had been paid and issued a Form 
W-2 by the state for providing in-home health care for her father, for which taxes were 
not withheld. For tax year 2010, he indicated in his SCA that he owed $6,500 due to an 
errant filing by his spouse, which caused his marital status to change and consequently 
required him to refile in 2012 or 2013. He stated in his Answer that he resolved the 
unpaid taxes for tax year 2009 through an installment agreement of $93 monthly, and 
he was continuing to pay the outstanding balance for tax year 2010 in accordance with 
the agreement. He provided a 16-month payment history with the IRS reflecting that he 
made payments of $93 monthly from November 2017 to January 2018, for a total of 
$1,488. He stated in his Answer that he expected that his $1,055 federal refund for his 
2016 federal income taxes would be applied towards his outstanding 2010 taxes. He 
also expected to use his $2,093 state refund to pay his bills. He did not provide 
                                                          
8 Items 3, 4, 9. 
 
9 Items 3, 4, 9; AE A. 
 
10 Items 3, 4, 9; AE A. 
 
5 
 
documentation to corroborate his claim that he resolved the unpaid taxes for tax year 
2009.11 
 
 Applicant indicated in his background interview that he would contact a debt- 
consolidation service to assist him with resolving his delinquent debts. There is no 
evidence in the record of any financial counseling.12 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
11 Items 3, 4, 9; AE A. 
 
12 Item 9; AE A. 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. He also failed to timely file his 2015 
federal and state tax returns and pay his federal taxes for tax year 2009. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from conditions beyond his control. 
However, he is required to show that he acted responsibly under his circumstances. 
The evidence in the record demonstrates that the garnishment order in SOR ¶ 1.h was 
issued to satisfy a judgment brought by the same creditor as SOR ¶ 1.c, and the order 
was terminated in March 2017, prior to the SOR. Neither debts are listed on the most 
recent credit report from December 2017. I therefore find SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h for 
Applicant.  
 
Applicant did not provide documentation to show that he has taken action to 
resolve, resolved, or disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, or 1.k. The 
documentation he provided failed to show that he filed his federal and state tax returns 
for tax year 2015, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j. At this time, there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) 
only partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), 20(e), and 20(g) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b, 1.d - 1.g, 1.i - 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
