 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 17-02681 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey DeAngelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Ryan C. Nerney, Esquire 
The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
May 16, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 24, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 20, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline G 
(Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the Department of Defense after June 
8, 2017. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on November 16, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on December 19, 2017. The case was assigned to another administrative 
judge on December 22, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 12, 2018. The case was reassigned to me on 
January 31, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 6, 2018.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through H, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and called two additional 
witnesses. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 13, 2018.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 27 years old and single. Applicant served in the Navy for over seven 
years, receiving an Honorable Discharge in December 2016. He is seeking to retain 
national security eligibility for a security clearance. (Applicant Exhibit D; Tr. 46-47.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a history of engaging in excessive alcohol consumption. Therefore he is 
potentially unreliable, and untrustworthy.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted allegations 1.a and 1.b in the SOR with 
explanations. He denied allegation 1.c. He also submitted additional evidence to support 
his request for a finding of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant was involved in one alcohol-related incident while in the Navy. This 
occurred in June 2014, when he was 23 years old. Applicant went to a pair of nightclubs 
with two friends and became inebriated, and also possibly drugged against his will. A 
friend put Applicant into his car, where he overslept because of his drinking, and was late 
to work the following day. Several months later he received Non-Judicial Punishment 
under the Uniform Code of Military Justice for the offenses of Drunkenness, and Drunken 
or Reckless Operation. He received a suspended reduction in rank, a forfeiture of pay, 
and 45 days extra duty. He served his punishment, and was not reduced in rank. He 
continued to serve for an additional two years before his term of service ended and he 
was honorably discharged. (Tr. 50-60, 79-80, 91.) 
 
 In August and September 2014 Applicant attended five weeks of alcohol-related 
treatment at a military medical center. He received a Summary of Treatment letter on 
September 26, 2014. That letter contained several subparts. His Discharge Diagnosis in 
the letter was, “Alcohol Use Disorder; moderate.” The first Aftercare Recommendation 
 
 
3 
 
 
contained in the letter was, “Maintain sobriety.” He then had a year’s worth of aftercare. 
(Government Exhibit 4; Tr. 60-64, 84-86.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that before the 2014 incident he often drank to excess when in 
the Navy. After the incident and during his treatment and aftercare he remained abstinent 
until about November 2015. After that time Applicant began drinking again, but at a 
reduced rate. His drinking decreased even more once he left the Navy and entered the 
civilian workforce in early 2017. Applicant stopped drinking altogether once this 
proceeding commenced in October 2017, stating, “[A]lcohol is clearly putting my career 
path, and my hopes and dreams in jeopardy.” He has no current plans to resume drinking. 
If he does resume drinking, he pledges not to abuse alcohol. (Applicant Exhibit H; Tr. 64-
69, 76-79, 81-83, 89-90, 92.) 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant received a substance abuse evaluation from a Licensed Professional 
Clinical Counselor, who is also Department of Transportation Substance Abuse 
Professional, in November 2017. She examined his medical records and interviewed 
Applicant, his father, mother, and step-father. She stated, “After interviews and 
assessment it appears that [Applicant] does not pose a risk for an alcohol dependence 
disorder at this time.” (Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. 69-71, 86-87.)  
 
 Applicant called two witnesses. The first witness is Applicant’s father, a retired 
sheriff’s deputy. Applicant has lived with his father since he left the military. The witness 
testified that he believes Applicant to be responsible and to have matured in the four years 
since this incident happened. Applicant’s father has noticed no issues with Applicant and 
alcohol since Applicant began living with him. (Tr. 15-30.) 
 
 Applicant’s other witness is a co-worker. He has been both a friend and mentor of 
Applicant since Applicant began working for his current employer. The witness is a 
recovering alcoholic with 23 years of sobriety. According to the witness, Applicant has a 
reputation for working hard, and has quickly been advanced into a leadership position. 
With regard to Applicant and alcohol the witness stated he has never seen Applicant drink 
and testified, “I haven’t had any, seen any exhibits of, of alcoholic behavior with him, and 
didn’t know there was any problem until this was brought up, this situation was brought 
up.” He has trusted Applicant in an important matter in his own personal life. (Applicant 
Exhibit G; Tr. 30-43, 45-48.) 
 
 Applicant provided several laudatory letters of recommendation. The writers 
include the commander, and executive officer of the military detachment Applicant 
supports. The commander stated that she finds Applicant, “reliable, motivated and more 
than competent.” The executive officer’s comments were similar in nature. A third letter is 
from the director of another military organization. This person oversees roughly 300 
people. He strongly supports Applicant receiving national security eligibility. All the letters 
 
 
4 
 
 
of recommendation provide examples of Applicant’s hard work, ability, and value to the 
company and program. (Applicant Exhibits B and C.) 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 
5 
 
 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for alcohol consumption are set out 
in AG ¶ 21, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant had a single alcohol-related incident in the Navy. He also arguably drank 
to excess before 2014, and was diagnosed with Alcohol Use Disorder; Moderate at that 
time. All of these conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate 
them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 23 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged alcohol consumption issues: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern or modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant has mitigated all the allegations in the SOR. Applicant admits drinking to 
excess before the June 2014 incident, which was almost four years ago. This single 
incident appears to be unique. As a result of this incident he went to prescribed treatment 
and aftercare, and remained completely abstinent from alcohol for at least a year, until 
November 2015. Once he left the service and began work in the private sector his alcohol 
consumption was greatly reduced because of the change in association. He is currently 
again abstinent. He has a recent evaluation from a licensed therapist finding that he does 
not currently have Alcohol Use Disorder. Both mitigating conditions apply to this case. 
Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The single alcohol-related 
 
 
7 
 
 
incident in this case, and Applicant’s excessive drinking, all occurred when he was young. 
He has modified his drinking habits considerably, shows the presence of rehabilitation, 
and is motivated to continue sobriety. Overall, the record evidence does not create doubt 
as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a security 
clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
