                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
. )     ISCR Case No.17-01079
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated June 27, 2017. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 10, 2016, and effective on June 8,
2017.
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on January 17, 2018. A notice of hearing was issued on March 15,
2018, scheduling the hearing for April 19, 2018. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-B. I held the record open until May 3, 2018, for additional submissions.
Applicant provided a packet of documents, which were collectively marked as AX C,
and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on May 1,
1
2018.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1a
through 1.q. He provided explanations for the allegations under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee for a defense contractor. He is single and
has no children. He obtained his undergraduate degree in international business in
2001. He has worked for his current employer for one year. Applicant completed his
security clearance application (SCA)  in November 2015. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges that Applicant has Federal delinquent taxes ($2,315) for tax
year 2014; delinquent Federal taxes ($38,968) for tax year 2015; a $10,500 state tax
lien; and other delinquent debts totaling more than $100,000. (GX 3)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that  his financial problems were due
to two periods of unemployment. When he lost his job, he used savings and retirement
to pay bills, but he exhausted his savings. In 2014, Applicant withdrew $93,000 from an
IRA.. This, of course, increased his taxes. He stated that he was in a payment plan for
the 2014 delinquent taxes and that he is working on arrangements for the 2015 tax debt
with an attorney. He is trying to sell his house. He is working toward resolving his
delinquent debts.  
Applicant acknowledged that he took a year off before looking for more
employment. He has show dogs and while unemployed, he traveled and took his show
dogs to various shows. (Tr. 19) Applicant also noted that he was depressed and
purchased many items on his credit cards. He called this his “recreational shopping.”
He did not have health insurance and so he did not seek mental health counseling for
his depression. (Tr. 21)
As to SOR 1.a, Applicant submitted an IRS tax transcript, which confirmed his
payment plan for the 2014 delinquent taxes. The plan began in April 2015 and the last
payment was made recently. (AX A) It appears that a $6,000 refund was credited
toward the 2014 taxes. (Tr. 23)
As to SOR 1.b, Applicant still has not resolved the 2015 tax issue. The
delinquent debt is $38,968. He stated that he filed his 2015 tax return, but the IRS has
no documentation of any filing. (Tr. 24) Applicant worked with a tax relief agency, but he
did not like their work and so he stopped dealing with them.  He is trying to find an
attorney to help him. He has no payment plan for the 2015 delinquent taxes.
2
As to SOR 1.c, a state tax lien in the amount of $10,516, Applicant stated that
the lien is for past-due 2014 income taxes. He has not contacted the state because he
was paying on another state tax lien. He plans to address this lien soon. (Tr. 27)
As to SOR 1.d, there was a mortgage in the amount of $2787,323 for Applicant’s
home. It was foreclosed in 2018. (Tr. 28) Applicant is not sure if the bank sold the
house nor the status of the mortgage. (Tr. 28) 
SOR allegations 1.e through 1.q involve credit card debt. Applicant claims that
he is trying to settle five or six of them. At the hearing ,Applicant could not recall exactly
which creditors he was working with or how much he has paid. (Tr. 29)
As post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided a 2018 credit bureau report and
a chart that showed some of the SOR debts. He provided some information showing 
one-time, recent payments on various accounts, but does not clearly show SOR debts
he partially paid. His 2018 credit bureau report shows some non-SOR accounts are
current. He has a large car payment of $597, which is current. Applicant earns about
$190,00 a year. He has not sought financial counseling. It appears that he has paid a
total of about $600 to various accounts. He stated that a large part of his expenses are
the upkeep of his show dogs and his car payment. (Tr.33) His plan is to pay one debt at
a time until they are all resolved. He does not want to file for bankruptcy.
  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded
on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance1
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual  Federal, state, or local income
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish the SOR delinquent
debts and the delinquent federal taxes for two years, in addition to a state tax lien and
other credit card delinquent debt. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise
disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(f).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
5
(g) the individual has made arrangement with the appropriate tax authority to file
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.
Applicant was unemployed for over a year in 2014, which explains some of  his
financial difficulties. However, he has been working and earning  a six-figure salary for a
year. He did not seek financial counseling. He did not present a budget. He has recently
paid his 2014 federal taxes through his payment plan. He has not begun a plan for the
2015 delinquent federal tax. He did not inquire about the house foreclosure and if he
owes any deficiency. He spent money on his show dogs, but was not proactive with
contacting creditors and making payment plans. He has a substantial amount of credit
card debt, as well as taxes.  He used his savings to pay bills, but he then seemed to
stop being responsible for his debts. He could not remember who he was making
payments to and how much. He just recently made a few payments which he included in
his post-hearing submissions. His financial problems are not under control at ths time. 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(d)
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He was unemployed for over a year. He is single and
has no children. His hobby of show dogs is an expensive one. He maintained that hobby
at the expense of not paying his taxes and other financial obligations. He admitted to
using his credit cards for “recreational shopping” until 2015. He admits he was
depressed but did not seek help. 
6
Applicant has not paid his federal and state taxes for two years. He has filed his
2016-2017 tax returns. He intends to pay his debts and pay his taxes but he needs help.
He still has unresolved debt despite his good intentions.  He recently made some small
payments to various creditors. However, he does not have a solid track record.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F. Accordingly, I
conclude that he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1q: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
