 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-02784 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) 
record without a hearing. 
 
 On November 9, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant 
material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant eight 
exhibits, pre-marked Items 1 – 8, which the Government offers for admission into the 
record. Applicant was given 30 days to raise an objection to the material offered by 
Department Counsel and submit her own evidence. She did not file an objection or submit 
a response. Accordingly, without objection, Items 1 – 8 are admitted into the record. 
 
 On April 13, 2018, I was assigned the case and then reopened the record to 
provide the parties an opportunity to submit updated information and evidence. 
Department Counsel submitted a recent credit report before the May 4, 2018 deadline for 
submission of new matters. Applicant submitted an email on May 14, 2018, further 
 
2 
explaining her financial situation. These matters were marked Items 9 and 10, 
respectively, and are admitted into the record. The record closed on May 15, 2018.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 39, earned her associate’s degree in 2004. Her husband died in 2002 
from cancer. She has four children, ranging in ages from 16 to 25. She has worked as a 
federal contractor in the security clearance field. From October 2006 to July 2013, she 
was employed by a federal contractor to conduct record searches for background 
investigations. She was then unemployed for six months (July to December 2013), before 
being hired by another federal contractor as a background investigator. She was fired 
from that position in September 2015 for poor work performance and was then 
unemployed until December 2015. Applicant has been employed since December 2015 
in low-paying jobs, earning about $25,000 annually.2 
 
In June 2011, Applicant was granted a security clearance in connection with her 
employment as a federal contractor. That same month, she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Applicant reported the 2011 bankruptcy on her recent security clearance application, 
noting financial problems related to raising her four children on her income alone, health 
problems, and mortgage issues as contributing factors leading to her bankruptcy filing. 
She reported on the application that the bankruptcy involved approximately $350,000 in 
debt. The petition that Applicant filed with the bankruptcy court listed liabilities totaling 
over $600,000, which included a $69,000 home equity line of credit and $53,000 in 
unsecured debt. Schedule J of Applicant’s bankruptcy petition reflects that her monthly 
expenses exceeded her monthly income by over $400. Applicant’s debts, including the 
judgment listed in SOR 1.ff, were discharged in bankruptcy in September 2011.3 
 
In May 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. She reported 
the 2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and numerous other delinquent debts that she incurred 
following the bankruptcy discharge.4 The (amended) SOR lists 31 delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $20,000. The 14 non-medical SOR debts total about $10,000. 
Applicant admits all the SOR debts, except 1.m, 1.n, and 1.ee. These three disputed 
debts are listed on Applicant’s credit reports.5 Applicant claims she obtained financial 
counseling and recently started a well-paying job that will allow her to pay her debts.6 She 
did not provide any documentation showing the resolution of any of the SOR debts or to 
substantiate the basis of her dispute.  
                                                          
1 Appellate Exhibit I (confirmation of jurisdiction and correspondence). 
 
2 Items 2, 3, 5, and 10. 
 
3 Items 3, 5, and 8. SOR 1.ff is listed on Applicant’s bankruptcy petition (Item 8) and an August 2016 credit 
report (Item 4 at 7) reflects that the judgment was discharged in bankruptcy. The SOR is amended to 
conform to the evidence by deleting (striking) SOR 1.ff.  
 
4 Item 3.  
 
5 SOR 1.m and 1.n are listed on Item 9 at Collections, number 5, and Trade Lines, number 19, respectively. 
SOR 1.ee, a 2015 judgment, is listed in Item 4 at 6.   
 
6 Item 10. 
 
3 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).7 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
                                                          
7 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
4 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. See AG ¶ 18. 
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 11-
05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
5 
 A security clearance adjudication is not meant to punish a person for past poor 
financial decisions. Furthermore, persons applying for a security clearance are not 
required to be debt free, or have unblemished financial records, or a certain credit score. 
However, they are expected to present evidence mitigating security concerns raised by 
the presence of delinquent debt and showing that they manage their present finances in 
a manner expected of all clearance holders.8  
 
Applicant failed to meet her burden of proof and persuasion. Some matters largely 
beyond her control negatively impacted her finances. However, she accumulated a 
sizeable amount of delinquent debt after receiving a Chapter 7 discharge in 2011 and 
provided no evidence of action on her part to address her delinquent accounts. Her 
financial situation does not appear under control. The disqualifying conditions listed at AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) have some limited applicability, but are 
insufficient, even when considered with the favorable whole-person matters raised by the 
evidence,9 to mitigate the security concern at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.ee, and 1.gg:       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.ff:          Deleted 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 See generally ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
9 See generally AG ¶ 2. I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C, but Applicant did 
not provide sufficient evidence that would warrant application of any of the exceptions in Appendix C. 
