 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00833 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason Perry, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 22, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A through M. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted 
into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 1.g, 1.i through 
1.m, and 1.o through 1.s. He denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.d though 1.f, 1.h and 1.n. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He graduated from college in 1997. He earned credits 
toward a master’s degree, but did not complete it. He married in 2004. He has a 23-
year-old stepdaughter and two children ages 21 and 18 years old. He has worked for 
the same federal contractor since 1997 and has held a security clearance since 2007 
without incident.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife had a serious gambling problem that began in 2006. She was 
leaving work during the day and gambling. Applicant became aware of the severity of 
the problem when she was arrested in November 2007 for grand theft after she was 
caught stealing from her employer to accommodate her addiction. His wife was 
responsible for handling their finances before this time. Applicant then changed his 
accounts, so she did not have access. She was arrested a second time in July 2008 for 
organized fraud. She was convicted and incarcerated in 2008 for felony grand theft and 
organized fraud. She is on probation for 30 years and required to pay restitution.3  
 
 Applicant’s wife participated in treatment for her depression and gambling 
problems from 2009 to 2012. Her therapist’s 2012 letter stated that her conditions were 
in remission with no reported gambling since they began therapy in 2009. She was 
released from therapy in April 2012. Applicant stated that the family monitors his wife’s 
depression and signs for relapse. His wife is on medication for anxiety.4 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($45,000-IRS) and 1.h ($650,000) are the sole 
responsibility of Applicant’s wife. The debt to the IRS is related to her gambling. 
Documents confirm that the correct amount owed is $4,793. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h is 
for restitution to the company she stole from, which is approximately $150,000, and the 
judgment in a civil suit is the remainder of the amount alleged. The loss of his wife’s 
                                                          
2 Tr. 19-24. 
 
3 Tr. 62-69. 
 
4 Tr. 69-71, 77-82; AE G. 
 
3 
 
 
income at the time (approximately $40,000) and her legal fees, which were over 
$30,000, had a financial impact on Applicant and his family. In 2015, his wife started two 
modest home businesses, which pay her monthly restitution and help with household 
expenses. She is current on her payments.5 
 
 In 2013, Applicant self-reported to his facilities security officer his financial 
delinquencies. At the time, he was attempting to qualify for a program to avoid the 
foreclosure of his home. He credibly testified that he had issues with the mortgage 
company because it had transferred his loan to a different mortgage company, and his 
payments increased. He did not agree to the changes. He repeatedly “got a runaround” 
and could not get a direct answer from the mortgage company to his inquiries.6 He 
stopped making the payments because of the mortgage company’s unauthorized 
increases. He admitted he should have continued to make mortgage payments. He 
attempted to get the mortgage modified, but the mortgage company chose to foreclose 
on the property. A class action lawsuit was brought against the original mortgage 
company, and Applicant received a settlement of $826. He testified he never 
understood the full extent of the lawsuit. He was advised he had no option to keep the 
house from foreclosure, unless he paid the deficiency.7  
 
Applicant sought bankruptcy protection to prevent the foreclosure and address 
his delinquent bills. He and his wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in February 2017. 
Included in the bankruptcy payment plan is his delinquent mortgage, his wife’s IRS debt, 
civil judgment, and all of the debts alleged in the SOR. Also included in the bankruptcy 
plan were credit cards, medical, and legal debts. This legal proceeding allowed him to 
save his house and pay some debts. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan was confirmed in 
March 2018. He explained the delay in confirmation was due to a determination of the 
value of a vehicle.8  
 
Before the plan was approved, Applicant made five payments of $2,873 from 
March 2017 to June 2017, and in August 2017. He made payments totaling $4,224 in 
October 2017; $4,536 in December 2017; $3,136 in January 2018; and $2,168 in 
February 2018.9 He explained he missed some payments because the amounts 
changed, but he made them up. He testified that in December 2017 he received a 
notice from the bankruptcy trustee that he failed to make a payment thereby dismissing 
the Chapter 13. He credibly testified that his bank account was hacked. The hackers 
would withdraw small amounts of money so the holder would not notice. By the time he 
became aware, the hackers had stolen several thousands of dollars. He has been 
working with the bank to resolve the issue, but has been unable to recover all of his 
                                                          
5 Tr. 56-60, 62-63; AE A, C, F, J. 
 
6 Tr. 50. 
 
7 Tr. 48-56, 83-87; AE A, E. 
 
8 Tr. 24-27. 
 
9 GE 4; AE A, B, C. 
 
4 
 
 
losses. The court reinstated the bankruptcy petition, and he was able to resume his 
bankruptcy payments. He admitted there were a couple of months that he had problems 
paying, but has made payments over the past 12 months.10  
 
The March 2018 Chapter 13 payment plan requires Applicant to make a payment 
of $2,168 in March 2018 and then payments of $3,143 from April 2018 until the plan is 
completed. Applicant recently received a pay raise and is confident he can pay the 
monthly amount.11 
 
The home equity loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a secured. An Agreed Order was 
filed in September 2017 to determine the status of the loan. The lien associated with 
this loan will be “stripped” when the Chapter 13 payment plan is completed. The value 
of the house is less that the mortgage. The mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c) is included in the 
bankruptcy. Applicant pays $1,145 monthly for his mortgage and $522 toward the 
arrearage. As of the date of the hearing, 12 payments had been made for the mortgage 
through the trustee of the Chapter 13 plan, and the payments are up-to-date. Applicant 
will continue to pay the arrearages through the bankruptcy plan. After all of the secured 
debt is paid, the unsecured debt may be paid. Applicant believed it was unlikely that the 
equity loan would be paid, but it will be discharged after the terms of the bankruptcy are 
completed.12 
 
Applicant’s wife’s IRS tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is being paid through the Chapter 13 
plan. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e through a credit bureau, believing it is a 
fraudulent credit card.13 
 
Applicant admitted that because of the circumstances regarding his wife’s legal 
and addiction problems, some of their bills were not being paid. He was overwhelmed 
caring for three children, addressing his wife’s issues, and working. He realized he had 
to make changes. He is now completely responsible for all of the family’s finances. 
Staying current with his Chapter 13 payment plan has allowed him to make better 
financial decisions and forces him and his family to live within their means. He accepted 
full responsibility for his actions. His family has weekly budget meetings. All of their 
debts are written down. He monitors all of the financial accounts. They budget for 
everything they need. His wife maintains a separate account for her business. Applicant 
monitors all of their accounts.14  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 27-43, 92-100; GE 4. 
 
11 Tr. 37-39; AE C. 
 
12 Tr. 44-48, 53-56; AE A, B, C, D. 
 
13 Tr. 60-62, 71-72, 74; AE B.  
 
14 Tr. 72-77. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant provided character letters that describe him as dependable, reliable, 
conscientious, honest, hard-working, and trustworthy. He consistently received high 
performance evaluations. His supervisors stated he has excellent technical skills.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
15 AE H, I. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.16 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that began accumulating in 
approximately 2008, which he was unable or unwilling to resolve. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are attributed to his wife’s addiction and criminal 
problems. The loss of her income and other resulting financial circumstances were 
beyond his control. Applicant also experienced issues with his mortgage company 
raising his payments. That issue was beyond his control, but his failure to pay his 
mortgage during this time was within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attempted to 
address his mortgage payments with the mortgage company. He was repeatedly 
frustrated by its failure to be responsive to his inquires. The mortgage company reached 
a settlement in a class action law suit. Applicant is addressing his debts through a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He made payments to the trustee before a plan was confirmed. 
All of the alleged debts are included in the plan. He has taken responsibility for handling 
all the family’s finances. They have budget meetings. His wife completed therapy for her 
gambling addiction. The family pays attention to her to ensure she does not relapse. I 
find there is sufficient evidence to conclude that he has acted responsibly, and his 
behavior is unlikely to recur. His behavior does not casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There is evidence Applicant received financial counseling through the mandatory 
bankruptcy requirement. He began addressing his financial problems prior to receiving 
 
8 
 
 
the SOR. He is resolving his delinquent debts through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
He adheres to a budget and closely monitors family spending. I find that his financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
 Applicant is addressing his delinquent debts through a bankruptcy payment plan. 
This is a legal means to address financial concerns. Applicant began making payments 
before his bankruptcy plan was approved. He has not ignored his debts. Although it is 
unlikely that all of his creditors will be paid, the evidence supports that he is making a 
good-faith effort to repay many of the creditors through the plan. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
 Applicant denied some of the alleged debts, but subsequently included them in 
his bankruptcy plan. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. His financial problem arose due to his wife’s gambling 
addiction, conviction and incarceration. The loss of her income and cost of her legal bills 
created a significant financial burden. He advised his facilities security officer of his 
financial problems. He eventually filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He has an approved plan 
and made payments on it prior to its approval. Under the circumstances in this case, I 
believe filing the bankruptcy was a responsible method to resolve the numerous 
delinquent debts and establish a track record of financial stability. His conduct no longer 
raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record 
 
9 
 
 
evidence does not leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
