 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-016651 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 29, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C were admitted in evidence. The record was 
                                                          
1 The Statement of Reasons misidentified this as an ADP (public trust position) case. Department 
Counsel and Applicant verified it is an ISCR (security clearance) case. The Statement of Reasons has 
been amended without objection. 
 
2 
 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that I 
have marked AE D through F and admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since September 2016. He has a 
bachelor’s degree. He is married with a child and a stepchild.2 
 
 Applicant owned a limited liability company (LLC) that manufactured millions of 
products for other companies. The products were then sold to consumers. The products 
used a technology that was common in most households and businesses. Due to 
technological advances, the products are no longer used by most consumers. 
Applicant’s company lost most of its business, and it was no longer viable to operate. 
The company became unprofitable and then stopped doing business completely in 
2016.3 
 
 Applicant and his company leased a piece of equipment to manufacture the 
products. The equipment was valued at about $340,000, and the lease was $10,000 per 
month. The leasing company obtained a $311,928 judgment against Applicant and his 
company in March 2016. The equipment is in the hands of a third party who is leasing it 
from the leasing company.4  
 
 Applicant was unemployed after his business closed for about five months until 
he obtained a job with a defense contractor in September 2016. The SOR alleges the 
$311,928 judgment and two delinquent debts totaling $3,284. The two debts are listed 
on multiple credit reports. The judgment is not reported on a credit report. Applicant 
disclosed the defaulted lease and other debts in his September 2016 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86).5 
 
 Applicant paid several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He had questions 
about the legitimacy of the two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. After he started 
working, he had the means of paying them, but when he contacted the creditors, he was 
informed the accounts had been closed and written off. These are the only two accounts 
with balances reflected on the three credit reports in evidence.6 
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 12-13; GE 1.  
 
3 Tr. at 7-10; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
4 Tr. at 7-10, 14-18; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
5 Tr. at 14; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
6 Tr. at 11, 19; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE A-B.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant decided that bankruptcy was his only feasible option for addressing the 
judgment. He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in January 2018. His dischargeable 
debts were discharged in April 2018. He received financial counseling as a requirement 
of the bankruptcy. His current finances are in order.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 11-12, 15, 19-21; AE C-F.  
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had financial problems related to his failed business. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. 
 
 Applicant had a successful business that sold millions of products until the 
technology that was the basis of the business became obsolete. His response was to 
close the business and work for a defense contractor. He paid several debts that were 
not alleged in the SOR. He decided that bankruptcy was his only feasible option for 
addressing the $311,928 judgment. His dischargeable debts were discharged in April 
2018. Of note is that the equipment that was the basis of the judgment is in the hands of 
a third party who is leasing it from the leasing company. He received financial 
counseling as a requirement of the bankruptcy. His current finances are in order.  
 
 I find that Applicant’s financial difficulties were the result of conditions that were 
largely beyond his control, and that he acted responsibly under the circumstances by 
resolving them through bankruptcy. They do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
