 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00383 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
continued eligibility for a security clearance. Although Applicant has made some 
payments toward the alleged delinquent accounts, he failed to establish a consistent 
history of debt repayment and financial rehabilitation. Applicant’s continued access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 28, 2017. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on  May 9, 2017, and provided a response. Given the age of this case, I re-
opened it to allow the parties to submit updated information. Applicant timely submitted 
several documents. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and those offered by Applicant are admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through I. All documents are admitted without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 57, has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, since January 
2006. He was granted access to classified information shortly thereafter. He completed 
his most recent security clearance application in December 2015, disclosing four 
delinquent accounts, totaling $18,000. Applicant’s background investigation confirmed 
the delinquent accounts. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $24,418 on four 
delinquent credit card accounts, which he admits.  
 
  Applicant’s financial problems became acute when two of his four children were 
in college at the same time. Applicant could not afford to pay tuition expenses in 
addition to his other financial obligations. He relied on credit cards to help ends meet.  
Between 2013 and 2014, the credit card accounts alleged in the SOR became 
delinquent. Applicant consulted a debt consolidation specialist who advised him to 
strategically default on the credit cards in order to prompt the creditors to settle the 
debts for less than the amount owed. Although it is unclear if he followed this advice, 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he has arranged payment plans with 
each creditor.  
  
 Through a number of sporadic payments between June 2016 and May 2018, 
Applicant reduced the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c by $900, and $375, 
respectively. He does not explain his inconsistent payment history. When Applicant 
answered the SOR, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were being collected by 
the same law firm. Between August 2016 and December 2016, Applicant paid $300 
toward these accounts. In January 2017, the law firm informed Applicant that the 
accounts was recalled by the original creditor and that future payments and inquiries 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
about the accounts should be directed to the original creditor. Applicant acknowledges 
that he was aware that the collection of the two accounts was transferred to another 
firm, but no one has contacted him about payments. He has not made any payments on 
the accounts since December 2016. 
 
 Applicant describes his current financial situation as good. He is current on his 
mortgage, car loan, and other consumer credit obligations.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An 
 
4 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at a greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.3  
 
The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has 
demonstrated a history of not meeting financial obligations and an inability to pay his 
creditors.4 Applicant receives partial mitigation for the payments he made to his 
creditors between August 2016 and May 2018. However, his sporadic payment history 
does not establish a good-faith effort to adhere to a payment plan to repay his creditors 
or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. The inconsistent payments also suggests that 
Applicant’s finances are not under control.  
 
  After reviewing the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”5 Although Applicant has  
held a security clearance for more than 10 years, his current financial situation warrants 
a reevaluation of his ongoing security worthiness. Applicant has incurred significant 
delinquent debt and has not submitted enough information to mitigate the related 
security concerns. Given his financial situation, continued access to classified 
information is not appropriate at this time. However, this decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not rehabilitate his finances 
and demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:      Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 Applicable financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶¶ 19 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and, 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
5 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
