1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No.: 17-00815 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
May 7, 2018 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised by his 
connections to family members who are citizens and/or residents of Pakistan. His 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
History of Case 
On September 3, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 17, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective September 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 4, 2017. (Item 1.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On July 24, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on July 24, 2017, and received by him on July 31, 2017. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days allotted, which ended 
August 30, 2017. DOHA assigned the case to me on December 18, 2017. Items 1 
through 4 are admitted into evidence.1  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Pakistan. Those facts are set forth 
in the following: Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Pakistan, marked 
as Item 4. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge 
and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. His admissions are 
incorporated into the following facts: 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is a native-born U.S. citizen. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree from U.S. universities. He has worked for his 
current employer, a government contractor, since August 2015. (Item 2.) 
                                                 
1 Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM or affirmatively waive any objection to Item 3, I will 
consider only those facts in Item 3 that are not adverse to Applicant unless they are also contained in 
other evidence or included in the admissions in his answer to the SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother, age 62, and father, age 74, are naturalized U.S. citizens. His 
mother was born in Pakistan and his father was born in India. His two brothers are also 
U.S. citizens. (Item 2.) Applicant’s parents own property in Pakistan and reside there for 
several months each year. Applicant explained, “Both of my parents have immediate 
family members in Pakistan, so whenever they visit they usually stay for several 
months. Also, due to the old age of my parents and the old age of their family members, 
they’re trying to spend as much time as possible with their loved ones.” (Item 1.)  
 
 Applicant married his wife in November 2013 in Pakistan. She is a citizen of 
Pakistan, residing with him in the United States. She immigrated to the United States on 
March 27, 2015. She has permanent resident status. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens of and residents in Pakistan. His father-in-
law is 61 years old. His mother-in-law is 47 years old. Applicant speaks to his in-laws “at 
least once a month over the phone” and visits them when he is in Pakistan. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant noted: 
 
[I]t is unlikely that I will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and any interests of the U.S. Both myself and my parents 
have deep longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that we can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Also, the value or routine nature of my parent’s property in Pakistan is 
such that it is unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure myself. (Item 1.) 
   
 The U.S. Department of State has issued a travel warning with respect to 
Pakistan. It notes that travel to all areas of Pakistan is unsafe due to the ongoing risk of 
extrajudicial and targeted killings, corruption within the government, suicide bombings, 
and insurgent attacks. Attacks may target governmental officials, humanitarian aid, and 
non-governmental organizations. Extremists associated are active throughout Pakistan. 
Widespread human rights abuses are reported. (Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
 
 
5 
 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
  Applicant has close family connections to his wife, a citizen of Pakistan, and his 
parents-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His parents, who are U.S. 
citizens, frequently travel to Pakistan for extended visits and own property there. An 
articulated heightened risk is associated with having ties to family members and 
property in Pakistan, due to the activities of terrorist organizations and insurgents 
operating within its borders. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions were established in this instance. The 
potential for a conflict of interest is present due to Applicant’s ongoing and significant 
ties to his family members and their property in Pakistan. He frequently communicates 
with his in-laws in Pakistan and his parents who travel to Pakistan for extended visits. 
While he claimed to have deep and longstanding relationships or loyalties in the United 
States, he failed to document evidence of those ties. The record contains little 
information on assets, or other deep and longstanding connections to the United States. 
Without more information, it cannot be determined that Applicant would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, or would not be subject to heightened risk 
of foreign influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. The record 
lacks sufficient information to support a finding that he would resolve any conflicts of 
interest in favor of the United States. His contacts and connections with Pakistani family 
members create ongoing heightened potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
