 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-00338 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alison V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of his inability to make payments to 
any of the creditors on his statement of reasons (SOR). He did not intentionally omit 
negative financial information on his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86) or security clearance application (SCA) with intent to deceive. Personal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations security concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On May 6, 2016, Applicant signed an SCA. Government Exhibit (GE) 1. On March 
10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006. Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
and personal conduct guidelines. HE 2. 
 
On April 18, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and initially waived 
his right to a hearing. He subsequently requested a hearing. On July 14, 2017, 
 
2 
                                         
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On December 5, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. On January 23, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for February 14, 2018. HE 1. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 5 exhibits; Applicant offered 12 
exhibits; and the only objection was to GE 5. Transcript (Tr.) 13-17; GE 1-5; Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A-AE L. Applicant’s counsel objected to consideration of GE 5 because it 
was not signed, and it lacks foundation and authentication. Tr. 14. I deferred ruling on the 
admissibility of GE 5 and admitted all of the other exhibits. Tr. 15-17. Applicant admitted 
all of the financial information in GE 5, and I did not admit GE 5 into evidence. Tr. 53. On 
February 22, 2018, DOHA received the hearing transcript. On April 16, 2018, Applicant 
provided three additional exhibits, which were admitted without objection. Tr. 56, 59; AE 
M-AE O.   
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he discussed his financial situation and efforts to 
resolve several delinquent debts. He denied that he intentionally made a false statement 
when he completed his SCA. He provided additional mitigating information. HE 3. His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who works overseas 
in security. Tr. 18, 20; GE 1. In 1991, Applicant graduated from high school. Tr. 25; AE 
D. He served on active duty in the Army from 1992 to 2016, for a total of more than 23 
years of active service. Tr. 19; AE D; AE N. He honorably retired as a sergeant first class 
(E-7). Tr. 19. His military occupational specialty was medic. Tr. 54. He completed 
numerous training courses while in the Army. AE A; AE N. He is receiving military retired 
pay and disability pay at an 80 percent rate from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
Tr. 19-20. In 1996, Applicant married, and his spouse does not work outside of their home. 
Tr. 26; AE D. His children are ages 5, 9, and 23. Tr. 18. In 2010, he earned an associate’s 
degree with a 3.8 grade point average. AE D. There is no evidence of security violations, 
abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In 2009, Applicant had two jobs, and that same year, the Army transferred him to 
a new location. Without the second job, his income decreased from about $7,000 monthly 
to about $4,000 monthly because his only employment was as a Soldier. Tr. 28, 30. In 
March and April 2009, Applicant said he was part of a government furlough, and he lost 
$12,000 income. Tr. 32. He conceded he ultimately received pay during the furlough 
period. Tr. 50. In 2010, his spouse had an ectopic pregnancy, and they lost the baby in 
November 2011. Tr. 25, 30. Before her medical issue, her monthly earnings were about 
$2,500. Tr. 26. After her surgery, she was on bedrest for about two months, and then she 
resumed employment outside their home about one year later. Tr. 26. While his wife was 
unable to work outside their home due to illness, he had financial problems and defaulted 
on some debts. Tr. 29.  
 
Creditors repossessed two of Applicant’s vehicles. Tr. 29. In 2011, his spouse 
became pregnant, and she was on bedrest during most of the pregnancy. Tr. 29. When 
his son was born in 2012, his son had medical problems, and needed to receive care in 
a hospital about 90 miles from Applicant’s home. Tr. 29-30. Applicant was unable to 
estimate his medical expenses. Tr. 31. His spouse did not work outside his home after 
2012. Tr. 48. Applicant was the victim of identity theft when someone charged a dental 
bill to him. Tr. 33.  Applicant occasionally receives information about his father’s charges 
and debts affecting Applicant’s financial records. Tr. 33.     
 
Applicant was unemployed for 90 days after retiring from the Army starting in 
January 2016. Tr. 46. Recently he was receiving $6,500 monthly as a security guard 
overseas. Tr. 21. His W-2 shows annual income of $86,322 with no federal taxes withheld 
because he was working overseas; however, the year is not indicated on the W-2. AE F. 
He currently receives $2,000 monthly in retired pay, and $1,880 monthly from the VA for 
his disability. Tr. 37; AE G. He is currently unemployed, and his monthly income is $3,880. 
Tr. 37. He said he received credit counseling, and he would provide proof of credit 
counseling after his hearing. Tr. 23. However, proof of financial counseling was not 
received after his hearing. 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $40,210. The record establishes the 
status of Applicant’s six SOR accounts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e allege four credit union debts placed for collection 
for $11,464, $9,280; $6,011; and $5,029 owed to the same creditor. At some point, 
Applicant said the creditor offered to bring his loans to current status with a lump-sum 
$3,500 payment. Tr. 32. Applicant said he made the $3,500 payment; nevertheless, the 
creditor repossessed two vehicles from Applicant around May or June 2009. Tr. 32, 41; 
GE 2. On August 5, 2017, Applicant wrote the collection agency and creditor seeking 
verification or validation of the accounts, and August 15, 2017, the collection agency 
responded and provided verification. Tr. 21; AE C. Applicant did not provide a copy of the 
verification documentation he received from the collection agent. On August 15, 2017, 
the original creditor wrote Applicant suggesting he raise his concerns with the credit 
reporting companies. AE J. Applicant said he had only two debts from this creditor: a 
 
4 
                                         
 
vehicle loan and a personal loan from the creditor. Tr. 24. He believed one of the 
repossessed vehicles sold for more than the amount he owed on it. Tr. 42. He disputed 
his debt with the creditor because he believed there were only two debts, and the amounts 
were too high. Tr. 39. He acknowledged that he owed about $9,200 on one debt, and he 
said he “wrote a counter-letter to it .  .  .  . So hopefully they’d be willing to do half, and I 
would pay whatever they decided to [agreed upon].” Tr. 43. Then Applicant said he had 
not offered to settle the debt because of his current unemployment status. Tr. 44. He said 
he may owe about $5,000 for the personal loan. Tr. 44-45. He did not have the funds to 
pay the two debts; however, if he received employment, he said he would pay the two 
debts. Tr. 51, 54. On February 18, 2018, he wrote the creditor and offered to pay $200 
monthly with the first $200 payment to be paid on April 1, 2018, until the balance of $5,029 
is paid. AE M. Applicant did not provide proof that the creditor agreed to the payment plan 
or that he made the first payment to the creditor. I find SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($9,280) and 1.e 
($5,029) are unresolved. SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($11,464) and 1.d ($6,011) are mitigated as 
duplications.      
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent debt placed for collection for $7,093. Applicant 
disputed his responsibility for the debt. Tr. 22; AE B. On August 5, 2017, he sent a letter 
to the creditor seeking to verify or validate the debt. AE B. According to Applicant’s July 
6, 2016 credit report the collection agent for this debt is the same collection agent that is 
pursuing Applicant for payment of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. GE 3. This debt does not appear 
on Applicant’s January 4, 2017 credit report. GE 2. I conclude the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($7,093) is a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent debt placed for collection for $1,333. Applicant 
disputed his responsibility for the debt. Tr. 22. He did not know the original creditor for 
this debt. Tr. 50. Applicant said he paid this debt. Tr. 22, 34, 45. He said he would have 
proof of payment the day after his hearing. Tr. 23. The record was held open to enable 
him to provide proof of payment. Tr. 23. He did not provide payment. The debt is 
unresolved. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s May 6, 2017 SCA asked whether he had any children. GE 1. He did 
not list any children even though he has three. GE 1. His May 6, 2017 SCA asked whether 
he had any foreign travel in the previous seven years. He answered no even though he 
was overseas when he filled out his SCA. These obvious errors show he was careless in 
the preparation of his SCA. 
 
Applicant’s May 6, 2017 SCA asked whether he had any vehicles repossessed in 
the previous seven years, and whether he had any debts turned over to a collection 
agency in the previous seven years. GE 1. He responded no to both questions about the 
repossession and debts in collections. GE 1. He admitted that he had two vehicles 
repossessed and debts in collections during the previous seven years. Applicant had six 
hours to complete his SCA. Tr. 35. He was overseas, and he telephoned relatives in the 
United States to collect biographical information. Tr. 36. He went through the SCA too 
 
5 
                                         
 
quickly and made mistakes on the financial questions. Tr. 36. He did not omit financial 
information with intent to deceive the government. Tr. 36; SOR response.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided supporting character letters from three retired first sergeants, a 
former battalion executive officer, a retired sergeant first class, a retired sergeant major, 
a first sergeant, a captain, an industrial hygienist, a site security officer, a warrant officer, 
and a site security coordinator. AE A; AE H. The general sense of his character letters is 
that Applicant is diligent, patriotic, loyal, honest, reliable, and trustworthy. AE A; AE H.  
 
Applicant received one Bronze Star Medal (BSM), eight Army Commendation 
Medals (ARCOM), seven Army Good Conduct Medals (AGCM), four Army Achievement 
Medals (AAM), two Iraqi Campaign Medals (ICM) with four Campaign Stars (CS), and six 
Overseas Service Ribbons (OSR). AE D; AE N. He earned the Expert Field Medical 
Badge (EFMB) in 2000. AE D; AE N. In 2005 and 2008, he completed two tours in Iraq 
for a total of 27 months in Iraq. AE D; AE K; AE N. In November 2017, he was employee 
of the month. AE L. He received numerous other awards and certificates of 
commendation. AE O. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
 
6 
                                         
 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
 
7 
                                         
 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $40,210. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence of any payments to address the SOR debts. Applicant is credited with 
mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($11,464), ¶ 1.c ($7,093), and 1.d ($6,011) because 
there is insufficient evidence to refute his claim that they are duplications of the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($9,280) and 1.e ($5,029).      
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control adversely affected his finances.  He had 
periods of unemployment, his spouse and son had medical problems, he was the victim 
of identity theft, and his spouse was unemployed. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
details about how these circumstances affected his finances. For example, he did not 
provide his tax returns or IRS tax transcripts over the last five years to show changes in 
his income.   
 
Applicant offered to start a $200 monthly payment plan on one of his debts 
beginning on April 1, 2018.4 He failed to show that this offer was acceptable to the 
creditor, and he did not provide proof of any payments. He said he paid the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.f ($1,333), and he promised to provide proof of payment after his hearing. He did not 
provide proof of payment. 
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address his SOR 
debts in ¶¶ 1.b ($9,280), 1.e ($5,029), and 1.f ($1,333). When he was working as a 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). A promise to pay debts is given greater weight when there is a track 
record of paying other debts. 
 
9 
                                         
 
security guard overseas and receiving military retired pay and VA disability pay, he was 
receiving a substantial income. He did not proof of payments, such as checking account 
statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or 
made any payments to address these three debts. He provided minimal correspondence 
to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact.5 He did not provide enough 
evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that he was making good faith attempts to resolve these three debts.  
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($9,280), 1.e ($5,029), and 1.f ($1,333).  
There is insufficient assurance that these three debts are being resolved.  Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”6  
                                            
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
6 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
10 
                                         
 
Applicant’s May 6, 2017 SCA asked whether he had any vehicles repossessed in 
the previous seven years, and whether he had any debts turned over to a collection 
agency in the previous seven years. Applicant responded no to both questions. He 
admitted that he had two vehicles repossessed and debts in collections during the 
previous seven years. He said he went through the SCA too quickly and missed the 
financial questions. He did not omit financial information with intent to deceive the 
government.   
 
I accept Applicant’s statement that he hurried through his SCA and did not carefully 
read several questions. He mistakenly answered no to several questions including visiting 
a foreign country, and failed to disclose that he had children. He was living overseas when 
he completed the SCA, and he has three children. He did not intend to deceive the 
government about his finances. He has refuted the allegation that he intentionally failed 
to disclose negative financial information on his SCA. Personal conduct security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works overseas 
in security. He honorably served in the Army from 1992 to 2016. He retired as a sergeant 
first class. He completed numerous training courses while in the Army. In 2010, he earned 
an associate’s degree with a 3.8 grade point average. He is receiving military retired pay 
and disability pay at an 80 percent rate from the VA. There is no evidence of security 
violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant provided 12 supporting character letters. The general sense of his 
character letters is that he is diligent, patriotic, loyal, honest, reliable, and trustworthy. He 
 
11 
                                         
 
received one BSM, eight ARCOMs, seven AGCMs, four AAMs, two ICMs with four CS, 
six OSRs, and the EFMB. He served a total of 27 months in Iraq. In November 2017, he 
was employee of the month. He received numerous other awards and certificates of 
commendation.  
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $40,210. Applicant is credited with 
mitigating all of the SOR debts, except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f. Applicant 
provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments 
and established payment plans for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f. The SOR was 
issued on March 10, 2017. He did not provide proof of any payments to any SOR 
creditors. He did not establish he had insufficient income to address these three SOR 
debts, after he received the SOR. His actions show lack of financial responsibility and 
judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability 
to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate 
security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant  
 
12 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
