 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-03811 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Troy L. Nussbaum, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant documented that his delinquent debts have been or are being resolved. 
He mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant mitigated the 
personal conduct security concerns over his answers to certain questions on his 
security clearance application about his drug involvement and resulting drug treatment. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 6, 
2015. On November 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security Executive Agent 
 
2 
 
 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2017 and requested a hearing. 
With his Answer, he submitted five documents or groups of documents. During the 
hearing they were subsequently marked as Answer Exhibits (Ans. Ex.) A through E. On 
February 14, 2018, Applicant’s counsel requested an expedited hearing. An attachment 
to that filing was marked as Ans. Ex. F.  
 
The case was assigned to me on February 15, 2018. The next day, a notice of 
hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for March 22, 2018, a date arranged with the 
parties. The hearing convened as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
submitted documents which were marked as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
GE 1, 2 and 4 were admitted without objection. GE 3 was not admitted. Applicant’s Ans. 
Ex. A-F were admitted without objection. Applicant also offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through O, which were admitted without objection. Applicant and two witnesses 
testified. I held the record open until April 2, 2018, to afford Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documentation. He timely submitted one document, which was 
marked as AE P and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript on 
March 30, 2018, and the record closed on April 2, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j and ¶¶ 1.l-1.n. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 2.a, 
and 2.b, with explanations and some documents. His admissions and other statements 
are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He did not graduate from high school. Since October 
2015, he has worked in cybersecurity for a defense contractor. He has never held a 
clearance. (Tr. 10, 32-33; GE 1) Applicant has never married and has no children. He 
lives with his girlfriend. She works for a federal government agency and holds a security 
clearance. (Tr. 131-133, 157) 
 
 From November 2005 to May 2007, Applicant operated his own retail business. 
The business failed, and Applicant lost about $200,000. (GE 1 at 16-17, 28-29) 
Applicant then worked for a remodeling company for about 18 months, from May 2007 
to January 2009. He then managed his own technology business for three years, until it 
failed in February 2012. (GE 1 at 14-15)  
 
 Applicant then worked for a media company for three and a half years, until July 
2015. He left the position to make a career change. He also moved to a new state. He 
was unemployed for three months, until starting his current job. (GE 1 at 11-13) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant had a serious auto accident in 2004, resulting in numerous broken 
bones, related surgeries and medical treatment. Applicant was immobilized for about six 
months. He also had a collapsed lung in 2014. (Tr. 38-39) 
 
 Following the accident, Applicant was prescribed Percocet by his orthopedic 
surgeon. He initially took the medication as prescribed. At some point, after about eight 
or ten months, Applicant began self-medicating by taking more than the prescribed 
dose. He subsequently became addicted. Applicant began seeking other options after 
his doctor declined to continue his prescription. (Tr. 39-42) This included seeking buying 
drugs on the street or from friends, at times in large amounts. (Tr. 39-42, 107-110) 
 
In about February 2006, Applicant went to a methadone clinic. He also sought 
medical help for his addiction. (Tr. 39-42, 110-112) From February 2006 to May 2013, 
Applicant was under the care of a medical doctor certified in treating drug 
dependencies. Applicant’s doctor provided him with “continued assistance with opioid 
dependence.” Applicant was stabilized on Buprenorphine/Naloxone. He visited the 
doctor at least every 30 days. His office visits consisted of medication management, 
counseling, and urine toxology screening. (Ans. Ex. D) 
 
According to his doctor’s letter, Applicant remained in full compliance with his 
treatment plan. He took his medication as prescribed, never requested early fills on his 
prescription, and never tested positive. He remained gainfully employed and maintained 
a healthy support network, including family, friends, colleagues, and participation in a 
12-step program. Applicant was withdrawn from the medication in May 2013. He was 
discharged with an “excellent prognosis for sustained recovery.” (Ans. Ex. D)  
 
Applicant testified that his recovery was “the single most difficult thing I’ve ever 
done in my entire life.” (Tr. 42) Applicant has not been under medical treatment for drug 
abuse since he was discharged from that program in May 2013 nor has he had any 
need for it. (Tr. 123) 
 
Guideline F 
 
 Applicant’s various delinquencies include medical debts, past-due utilities, and a 
tax lien. He attributed his debts to multiple factors, including his 2004 auto accident, a 
job loss, and a business failure. He also has had serious health problems and physical 
ailments resulting from the accident (as well as his addiction). He also had periods 
when he did not have medical insurance. (Tr. 123-127) 
 
In December 2017, Applicant signed up with a debt-resolution service. Through 
their assistance, Applicant resolved most of the debts in the SOR before the hearing. 
Applicant acknowledged that before receiving the SOR, he made no significant effort to 
resolve his debts, due to lack of income. He and his girlfriend testified that they 
contacted the debt service before receiving the SOR, because they want to buy a 
house. (Tr. 57, 127-129, 150-151; Ans. Ex. A; Ans. Ex. B; AE K) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Several of Applicant’s delinquencies are medical debts. This includes SOR ¶¶ 
1.a ($3,132); 1.c ($1,096); 1.e ($491); 1.f ($458); 1.j ($34); 1.m ($1,096) and 1.n ($746). 
Some of these debts were incurred when Applicant was working as an independent 
contractor and did not have health insurance. Applicant paid $150 towards ¶ 1.a, paid 
$1,352 to settle SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f and 1.j. He settled ¶ 1.n for $150. He will pay off 
SOR ¶ 1.a through an automatic payment plan. (Tr. 58-61, 66-67, 73; AE A; AE C; AE 
J) SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.m are the same medical debt. (Tr. 16-17; 168-170, 176-177; GE 2 
at 8; GE 4 at 2) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b ($2,039) is an account placed for collection by an apartment complex. 
Applicant settled the account for $1,529. (Tr. 61-66; AE B) SOR ¶ 1.c ($578) is an 
account placed for collection by a phone company. The account has been settled and 
closed. (Tr. 67-69; AE D) SOR ¶ 1.g ($449) is a past-due utility bill. The account is 
closed with no balance owed. (Tr. 70-71; AE E) SOR ¶ 1.h ($409) is a past-due cable 
bill. Applicant settled the account for $271. (Tr. 71; AE F)  
  
 SOR ¶ 1.i ($386) is an old, past-due energy bill. He settled the debt for $192 in 
March 2018. (Tr. 71-72; AE G) SOR ¶ 1.l ($1,582) is an electric bill placed for collection. 
Applicant settled the account for $200. (Tr. 72; AE I) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.k is a federal tax lien issued in 2007 for $16,067. It concerned tax years 
2002, 2003, and 2005. (AE H; AE P) Applicant testified during that period, he worked as 
an independent contractor. He received a Form 1099 but testified that he did not know 
what do with it. He said he hired an accountant, who did not do a good job. At some 
point, Applicant was living with a cohabitant and her daughter. He attempted 
unsuccessfully to claim them as dependents on his tax returns. Ultimately, he had 
income taxes that he was unable to pay. (Tr. 74-76, 94; GE 1 at 33) 
 
 Applicant testified that for several years, beginning in about 2011, the IRS kept 
his tax refunds to pay down his past-due taxes. He was not otherwise on a payment 
plan. (Tr. 77-78, 89-93) He testified that he knew he owed past-due taxes, but said he 
was not aware that a tax lien had been issued against him until he received the SOR. 
He said the lien did not appear on the credit report he pulled when he filled out his SCA 
(though it was listed on GE 2). Applicant received a $3,147 tax refund in July 2017, his 
first refund in several years. (Ans. Ex. C) The tax lien has been released. (AE H) Once 
he learned about the lien, Applicant testified that he spent significant time and energy 
sorting out with the IRS whether he owed them anything. He does not believe he owes 
any other past-due taxes. (Tr. 77-82, 84-89) 
 
 Applicant was hired by his current employer in 2015 at a salary of $75,000. When 
he disclosed his debts on his SCA, he noted that until he was hired for that job, he was 
unable to pay his debts. (GE 1 at 33) Applicant now earns about $93,000. He moved in 
with his girlfriend about a year and a half before the hearing. Their combined income 
improved his finances. Applicant now has a healthy monthly surplus. (AE M; AE N, AE 
O) Applicant’s intentions are to continue to resolve his debts. He is enrolled in a credit-
monitoring service. (Tr. 104, 129-130, 152)  
 
5 
 
 
Guideline E 
 
In preparing his SCA, Applicant pulled a credit report and listed numerous 
delinquencies, including medical debts and utilities. He also noted that he had some tax 
problems, and disclosed other material background information. (GE 1 at 28-30, 33-41; 
Tr. 47-52)  
  
 Section 23 of Applicant’s November 2015 SCA contains the following question 
under “Misuse of Prescription Drugs”:  
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you intentionally engaged in the misuse 
of prescription drugs, regardless of whether or not the drugs were 
prescribed to you or someone else?1 
 
Applicant answered “No.” In SOR ¶ 2.a, the Government alleged that Applicant 
thereby deliberately failed to disclose that he “used Percocet from about 2004 to at least 
2009, used Methadone from about 2004 to at least 2009 and used Suboxone from 
about 2009 to at least 2013.”  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 2.a, on the grounds that his answer to the question was 
accurate. (Answer; Tr. 119) He explained in his Answer that he was prescribed 
Percocet in 2004, after his auto accident. Applicant acknowledged that he became 
dependent on the drug “for a period of four to five months” afterwards, in 2004. He said 
his “last use of Percocet was 2004,” well before the seven-year scope of the question 
on the SCA. (Answer; Tr. 114, 117) 
 
Applicant also denied ever misusing methadone, though he acknowledged that 
he was prescribed the drug at a methadone clinic in 2005-2006 (again, well before the 
seven-year scope of the question). (Answer) Similarly, he denied ever misusing 
Suboxone while under his doctor’s care between 2006 and 2013. (Answer; Ans. Ex. D;2 
Tr. 115-116) 
 
 At hearing, Applicant testified that the last time he ever misused a prescription 
drug was 2005. While under his doctor’s treatment, he took random urinalysis tests at 
least once a month, without incident. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 GE 1 at 32. 
 
2 Ans. Ex. D references Buprenorphine and Naloxone, the generic name for Suboxone, the opioid 
medication referenced in SOR ¶ 2.a. See https://www.drugs.com/suboxone.html. (Tr. 111-112) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Section 23 of Applicant’s November 2015 SCA contained the following question 
concerning voluntary drug treatment:  
  
Have you EVER voluntarily sought counseling or treatment as a result of 
your use of a drug or controlled substance?3 
 
Applicant answered “No.” In SOR ¶ 2.b, the Government alleged that Applicant 
thereby deliberately failed to disclose that he sought treatment with a medical doctor for 
opioid dependence from 2006 to 2013. 
 
Applicant admitted incorrectly answering the question on the SCA but denied 
deliberate falsification. (Answer; Tr. 120) He offered no excuse in his Answer, but 
denied that he intended to be duplicitous, as he voluntarily disclosed the information to 
the investigator during his background interview. (Answer)  
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that he told the investigator “the entire story,” and 
“she had me fill out a form . . . a medical release form.” (Tr. 120-121). He testified that 
the investigator was not aware that Applicant had sought medical treatment until he told 
her about it. (Tr. 121) The summary of Applicant’s background interview is not in 
evidence.  
 
Applicant denied any intention to hide his drug treatment or to falsify his SCA. 
(Tr. 49, 55) He considers the fact that he overcame his addiction through that treatment 
to be “an exceptional accomplishment.” (Tr. 50)  
 
 Applicant testified that he has overcome many hardships to get where he is in 
life. This includes overcoming his addiction, his lack of formal education, and his failed 
businesses. He greatly enjoys his job and derives satisfaction from the important work 
that he does. (Tr. 32-33, 52-54) 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend testified on his behalf and provided a reference letter. She 
works for the Defense Department, and has held a clearance for the past five years. 
She and Applicant have dated since August 2016, which was when they met. She 
considers Applicant one of the most honest people she has ever met. He “laid 
everything out for me” about his past when they met. (Tr. 143-157) 
  
 A co-worker of Applicant’s testified by phone. They have worked closely together 
for four years. The co-worker regards Applicant as trustworthy and honest. He has a 
reputation for “getting the job done” and for a strong work ethic. (Tr. 136-141) Numerous 
references noted his “can do” attitude, dedication, honesty and trustworthiness. (Ans. 
Ex. E; Ans. Ex. F) 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 GE 1 at 32. (emphasis in original)  
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”4 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . 
 
The following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16 is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant misused Percocet (and became addicted to it) in 2004 and 2005. He 
sought treatment for his addiction at a methadone clinic and then with a medical doctor. 
Both his misuse of Percocet and his use of methadone occurred more than seven years 
before November 2015, when he submitted his SCA. Thus, he was not required to 
disclose either use. Applicant’s use of Suboxone occurred between 2006 and February 
2013, but it was in accordance with a prescription. He also submitted a letter from his 
medical provider documenting that Applicant took his medication as prescribed, never 
requested early fills on his prescription, and never tested positive. Thus, Applicant did 
not “intentionally engage in the misuse of prescription drugs,” so he had no duty to 
disclose his Suboxone use on his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) is not established as to SOR ¶ 2(a). 
 
 Applicant’s SCA had a question requiring him to disclose that he underwent 
medical treatment for his opioid dependence from 2006 to 2013. Applicant disclosed 
substantial background information on his SCA, but he did not disclose his drug 
treatment. On the one hand, I credit Applicant with his candor in disclosing other 
derogatory information, including about his financial history. On the other hand, given 
the amount of time he spent preparing his SCA, I cannot say that Applicant simply 
overlooked the drug treatment question, nor did he claim that he misread or misinterpret 
it. Give the plain language of the question, and the record evidence that Applicant was 
in voluntary drug treatment as recently as 2013, AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth the Guideline E mitigating conditions, of which the following 
are potentially applicable:    
  
 
9 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 The summary of Applicant’s background interview is not in evidence. However, 
Applicant both explained in his Answer and testified at hearing that he volunteered the 
information about his drug treatment to the interviewing agent before being confronted 
about it. He testified that he was asked to fill out a medical release form during the 
interview, and he did so. This testimony is unrebutted. It is also credible, as the identity 
of Applicant’s drug treatment provider would likely have been known only to him. AG ¶ 
17(a) applies, since Applicant “made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.”  
 
 Although Applicant provided significant details on his SCA about his finances and 
other information, he nonetheless failed to disclose his drug treatment. Falsification of 
even a single question on a security clearance application is not a minor offense. 
However, through his disclosure of his drug treatment to the investigator, cooperation 
with the investigation, and his candor at the hearing, Applicant established that he is 
rehabilitated. Applicant’s falsification of his SCA is unlikely to recur and no longer casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) partially applies. 
SOR ¶ 2.b is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure  . . . to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant’s incurred numerous unresolved delinquent debts over the last several 
years, including medical debts, utilities, and past-due federal income taxes. AG ¶¶ 19 
(a), 19(c) and 19(g) apply.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Many of Applicant’s debts are medical debts, incurred after a serious auto 
accident, or due to a serious medical condition. Some of these debts occurred during 
periods when Applicant did not have medical insurance. Several of Applicant’s other 
debts, including his tax debt, are due to employment instability and business failures. 
These were conditions beyond his control that impacted his finances. The first prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 For full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must establish that he acted 
reasonably under the circumstances. Applicant acknowledged that before receiving the 
SOR, he made no significant effort to resolve his debts, due to lack of income. Shortly 
before he received the SOR, Applicant retained a debt-resolution service to help him 
resolve his debts. Most of his debt payments occurred earlier this year. He therefore 
gets less credit under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) than if he had done so earlier. 
Nevertheless, his debts are largely repaid and being resolved. His finances have 
significantly improved. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
 Similarly, Applicant testified that he did not independently establish a payment 
plan with the IRS to resolve his significant federal income tax debt. However, that debt 
was resolved over several years through the IRS’s recapturing of Applicant’s tax 
refunds. The lien was issued in 2007 and it was released in 2016. Applicant also 
received a tax refund in 2017. AG ¶ 20(g) applies.  
 
11 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has taken a long road to get to where he is. He has overcome many 
hardships, including a lack of a formal education, failed businesses, a serious auto 
accident and related medical treatment, as well as an addiction to opioids. Some of 
these hardships are due to conditions beyond his control, and some of them are due to 
his own bad choices. However, Applicant’s professional and personal lives have both 
stabilized. I conclude that his financial delinquencies are resolved and are unlikely to 
recur. I conclude that while he should have disclosed his drug treatment on his SCA, he 
mitigated the security concern by voluntarily disclosing it to the interviewing agent and 
cooperating fully with the investigation. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
