 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 17-03750 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                                                      For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued to him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
dated December 18, 2017, he admitted all allegations and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On February 28, 2018, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to me 
on May 17, 2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to 
mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, a high school graduate, is a 33-year-old aircraft mechanic who has 
worked for the same entity since 2016. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from October 2004 until October 2013, when he was honorably discharged. Other than a 
period of unemployment from July 2015 to October 2015, Applicant has been employed 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
since his military service. He married his wife in late 2011, immediately following his 
divorce from a former spouse. He has two children, ages 8 and 6.  
 
In completing his October 2016 application for a trustworthiness position, Applicant 
disclosed that he had some debt. In response to the SOR, he admitted, and his credit 
reports reflect, that he has about $20,000 in delinquent debt. Reflected in SOR allegations 
1.a-1.j, his delinquent accounts consist of consumer debts, utilities, and a U.S. Veteran’s 
Administration debt. Those debts range from $92 to $5,567.  
 
In responding to the SOR, Applicant wrote that he has paid the U.S. Veteran’s 
Administration debt noted at allegation 1.b for $4,020. He failed, however, to provide any 
documentation corroborating this claim. Otherwise, Applicant simply wrote “I admit” in 
response to each delinquent account noted in the SOR allegations. 
 
The FORM offers scant information about Applicant in terms of how he acquired 
the debt at issue. His 2011 divorce and remarriage, and his brief period of unemployment 
in 2015, are the only conditions noted that may have contributed to his financial distress. 
References to those events, however, are so brief, it cannot be assessed whether he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant offered no explanation regarding 
his strategy for addressing his delinquent debt, if any. He similarly gave no indication as 
to his present financial fitness.  
 
Policies 
 
In this matter, The Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, is controlling. The DOD considers 
ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be eligible for sensitive duties, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be such that assigning the 
person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the national security interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural 
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made. 
(Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
 
 
 
 
3 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security” standard requires that “any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). An eligibility for a public trust position decision 
is not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. It is merely an indication 
that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established 
for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admits, and his credit reports reveal, that he has about $20,000 in 
unaddressed delinquent debt. This is sufficient to invoke disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so;  
and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number and, based on the scant 
evidence offered, largely unaddressed. No evidence of a good-faith effort to repay any of 
the debts was offered. Moreover, the reasons as to how this situation was created and 
why it continues are unknown. While it can be assumed that Applicant’s divorce and short 
period of unemployment may have contributed to their creation or perpetuation, 
insufficient facts were offered to gauge whether Applicant acted responsibly at the time. 
Further, there is no evidence he has received financial counseling, and there is no 
suggestion he disputes any of the debts cited.  Given the paucity of information offered, 
none of the available mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old aircraft mechanic who has earned a high school diploma 
and served honorably in the U.S. military. Other than a period of unemployment from July 
2015 to October 2015, he has been continuously employed since his military discharge. 
Previously divorced, he remarried in 2011. He has two minor children.  
 
In relying on the written record, Applicant chose a determination on the most scant 
of facts. There is little to no information as to the creation of the debts at issue, what led 
to their delinquency, or what, if any, efforts he has taken to address them. Even his sole 
reference to payment of one of the delinquent accounts at issue is terse, unelaborated, 
and unsubstantiated. There is no indication as to what measures he has or can take in 
relation to these delinquent debts. Without more information, financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied.  
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
