 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ADP Case No. 17-03931 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                 For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On December 13, 2017, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued to him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
notarized on January 16, 2018, he admitted all allegations and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On February 26, 2018, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) with seven attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to 
me on May 17, 2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old calibration technician who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since April 2016. Before accepting this position, he worked part time 
for about three months, following a period of continuous employment dating back at least 
a decade. He has earned a high school diploma. Single, he has one teenage child. 
 
Little is known of Applicant’s financial background. What is known is that by 2009, 
Applicant had been spending too much money, accumulating too many bills, and living 
beyond his means. To get a “fresh start,” he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 
2009. (FORM, Item 3, at 2) That bankruptcy was discharged in May 2009,  
 
By 2014, Applicant was again living beyond his means and had accumulated more 
delinquent debt. In particular, he had overused credit cards that were offered to him when 
his credit improved after his 2009 bankruptcy was discharged. He was also facing eviction 
at the time. In February 2014, he applied for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection “in an effort 
to pay off his debts on his own and learn how to manage his money properly.” (FORM, 
Item 3, at 2) He reported that, as of September 2017, payments to his bankruptcy trustees 
were being made by automatic debit from his pay.  
 
Despite the relief provided by the 2014 bankruptcy petition, Applicant again has 
acquired notable delinquent accounts. In his answer to the SOR, he attributed them to 
“poor financial management.” (SOR Response) At issue in the SOR are the following 
allegations related to delinquent accounts:2 
 
1.c - Telephone provider collection account ($808) – In response to the FORM, 
Applicant attributed this balance to his understanding that a subsequent provider, noted 
below at 1.g, would buy out this account if he switched to its plan. That did not occur. In 
response to the SOR, Applicant wrote that he had contacted this creditor and would pay 
the balance over time. No documentary action was offered reflecting a formal dispute or 
commencement of payments on the balance owed. 
 
1.d – Telephone provider collection account ($470) – In response to the FORM, 
Applicant wrote that this is the remaining balance on an account that he had thought was 
included in his last bankruptcy. He noted that he has since made arrangements to pay 
this debt, but no documentary evidence of payment was offered. 
 
1.e – Utility collection account ($133) – In response to the FORM, Applicant noted 
that he had thought his deposit would cover any final balances. He offered a copy of an 
August 2014 bill reflecting this balance due. (FORM Response) He wrote he is making 
payments on the debt, but offered no documentary evidence of such payments.  
 
1.f – Delinquent medical account ($46) – In response to the FORM, Applicant wrote 
that he had thought this was a past-due deductible to be paid by his health care insurer. 
                                                          
2 SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b pertain to Applicant’s 2009 and 2014 bankruptcy petitions, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
3 
In response to the SOR, Applicant wrote he would begin payment on this debt in 2018. 
No documentary evidence reflecting any payment was offered.  
 
1.g – Telecommunications collection account ($835) – In response to the SOR, 
Applicant wrote that he had agreed to a settlement on this account with payment of 
$459.56. A copy of the December 2017 offer of settlement was attached to his FORM 
Response, but no documentation reflecting acceptance of the offer or payment toward 
the offered settlement sum was offered.  
 
1.h – Collection account ($28) – Applicant thought his “ex” had handled this debt 
after their break-up. In response to the SOR, Applicant wrote he would pay this debt in 
2018. Later, in response to the FORM, he wrote that he had made arrangements to settle 
the debt, but no documentary evidence of any such efforts was introduced. 
 
In addressing the FORM, Applicant apologized for raising any concerns regarding 
his security clearance suitability. He wrote that he had taken actions to make payment 
arrangements, receive financial counseling, and seek secondary employment, but 
provided scant information corroborating these assertions.3 He noted that financial issues 
have never distracted him from his professional duties, and that he would never break the 
law. He loves his job and is proud to work in his hometown. 
 
Policies 
 
In this matter, The Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, is controlling. The DOD considers 
ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be eligible for sensitive duties, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be such that assigning the 
person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the national security interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural 
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made. 
(Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
                                                          
3 Notice is taken that Applicant would have had to complete financial counseling as a requirement for 
filing both bankruptcy petitions.  
 
 
 
 
4 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security” standard requires that “any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). An eligibility for a public trust position decision 
is not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. It is merely an indication 
that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established 
for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F- Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the concern under this guideline is that 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admits he filed for bankruptcy protection in both 2009 and in 2014, 
and has since accumulated additional delinquent debts. He admits that his past 
bankruptcy petitions were caused, in part, by overspending and failing to live within his 
means. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 
 
 
5 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant has a history going back almost a decade reflecting his inability to live 
within his means. This history continues to date, despite two bankruptcy petitions, in 2009 
and 2014. Based on the documentary evidence offered by the Government, his more 
recent delinquent debts remain largely unaddressed. Applicant offered scant information 
regarding his efforts to avoid this recurring scenario of debt acquisition from repeating 
itself in the future, other than noting he is making payments on his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. 
That, and the fact insufficient time has passed for him to demonstrate that he can live 
within his means moving forward, obviate application of AG ¶ 20(a). Moreover, inasmuch 
as his problem is not based on circumstances beyond his control, AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
It can be assumed that Applicant received financial counseling as one of the 
requirements associated with the bankruptcy filing process. However, there is scant 
information indicating Applicant’s financial planning has improved or that his debts are 
now being resolved or brought under control. Furthermore, while he was able to address 
past delinquent debts through bankruptcy, which is a lawful and legitimate method for 
addressing such financial distress, it has become axiomatic in this forum that bankruptcy 
does not necessarily reflect a good-faith effort to address one’s debts.  Consequently, AG 
¶ 20(c)-(d) do not apply. Moreover, in the absence of documentation that Applicant has 
formally disputed any of the delinquent debts now at issue, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old technician who has worked for the same entity since 
April 2016. He has been continuously employed in some capacity for over a decade. He 
has earned a high school diploma. He is single and is the father of a teenage child.   
In 2009, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection to get a “fresh start” 
after a protracted period of accruing significant delinquent debt by overspending and 
failing to live within his means. This scenario repeated itself in February 2014, when he 
sought another fresh start by filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. By the time the 
SOR was issued in December 2017, he was again spending too much money, failing to 
live within his means, and acquiring more delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant’s cycle of debt acquisition has repeated itself thrice over the past decade. 
The evidence offered in response to both the SOR and the FORM references efforts taken 
to address the six delinquent debts presently at issue, but there is no documentary 
evidence reflecting progress on any of these delinquent accounts. This lack of progress 
is not just limited to the larger debts, such as the one for $835, but extends to the minor 
debts, with balances of $28 and $46.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to satisfy all of his delinquent debts. It 
does, however, expect an applicant to have formulated a realistic method or strategy for 
addressing his delinquent debts, and to offer some documentary evidence indicating such 
a strategy has been implemented. Here, with no documentary evidence of progress on 
these delinquent balances, and, aside from mere promises to pay in the future, no actual 
strategy for realistically addressing them in the future, financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
trustworthiness position. Eligibility to occupy a trustworthiness position is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
