 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03779 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from his history of 
financial problems or difficulties. He provided a reasonable explanation to justify 
omission of delinquent financial accounts from his May 2016 security clearance 
application. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on May 9, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on November 16, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
and Guideline E for personal conduct.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2017. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He did not submit supporting 
documentation with his answer, although he did provide a two-page memorandum in 
explanation.       
 
On January 3, 2018, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it on January 26, 2018. He did not reply within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
The FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation (ROI) 
summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the 2017 background 
investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.2 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits receipt and 
consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The Directive 
provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication 
requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI. 
Accordingly, given the lack of authentication, I have not considered the ROI in reaching 
my decision.  
 
I also note that Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising 
Applicant that the ROI was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a 
“waiver” of the authentication requirement. In my view, Department Counsel is misusing 
the term waiver, and this misuse may confuse an applicant.3 In the law of evidence, 
errors are preserved by timely objections, and relief on appeal is granted from a 
preserved error unless it is harmless (the harmless-error doctrine). Waiver is the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment of a legal right or advantage. With a waiver, 
there is no error to correct on appeal and no relief to grant. On the other hand, failure to 
make a timely objection usually forfeits any error, and relief on appeal is appropriate 
                                                          
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
3 See United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993) (in this opinion, the Supreme Court distinguishes 
between forfeiture and waiver).  
 
 
3 
 
from a forfeited error only upon a showing that the error was plain, obvious, and 
prejudicial (the plain-error doctrine). This discussion highlights the complexity involved 
in expecting a layman applicant to understand authentication, waiver, forfeiture, and 
admissibility, as those legal concepts are used in deciding a security clearance case 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.    
 
In addition to Exhibit 3 of the FORM, I have also excluded Exhibit 7, which is 
document known as an Investigative Request for Employment Data and Supervisor 
Information (OPM INV Form 41). The document was completed by a former employer of 
Applicant. Exhibit 7 is excluded under ¶ E3.1.22 of the Directive, because it constitutes 
a third-party statement adverse to Applicant on a controverted issue.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as a software engineer for a federal contractor. He has been so employed since May 
2016. His educational background includes an associate’s degree awarded in 2001 and 
graduate-level work during 2010-2012.    
 
Applicant’s employment history, as reflected in his security clearance application, 
includes a lengthy period of unemployment of at least two years that ended in March 
2014. He also had two periods of unemployment, each about six months in duration, 
during 2014-2015 and 2015-2016. His employment history does not include military 
service.  
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of six 
charged-off or collection accounts for a total of about $34,712. The delinquent accounts 
are established by Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR as well as credit 
reports from 2016, 2017, or 2018.4   
 
Applicant omitted the six delinquent debts when he responded to various 
questions about his financial record in Section 26 of his security clearance application. 
In his answer to the SOR, he stated that it was never his intention to withhold 
information and he did not realize that he had selected the “no” response to the 
questions in Section 26. He further stated that answering “no’ was an honest mistake 
that he did not notice or catch before submitting his security clearance application. In 
addition, he pointed to his willingness to discuss his finances and a credit report during 
the August 2017 background investigation.   
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that the six delinquent accounts 
were the result of the lengthy period of unemployment that ended in March 2014. He 
described it as a difficult situation and he never anticipated being unemployed for such 
a lengthy period. He further stated that he paid the $306 collection account for a cable 
                                                          
4 Exhibits 4, 5, and 6.  
 
 
4 
 
television account, but otherwise not paid the other accounts because they had been 
charged off (he used the term discharged) and could not repay them. 5 
 
As Applicant did not reply to the FORM, he did not take advantage of the 
opportunity to submit documentation in extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate, in support of his case.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.6 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”8 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.9 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.10 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.11 An 
                                                          
5 Applicant’s statement reflects a common misunderstanding of a charged-off debt. The term “charge off” 
means a creditor has given up collection of an unpaid debt and it considers the remaining balance to be 
bad debt. The creditor is simply charging or writing off the debt as a loss for accounting purposes. Having 
a debt charged off by a creditor does not mean that the debt is paid, cancelled, forgiven, or is no longer 
collectable. A debtor is still liable to repay the money unless the matter is settled or the relevant statute of 
limitations has been reached.  
 
6 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
 
5 
 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.12 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.13 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.14 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.15 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.16 
  
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special concern is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.”17 A statement is false when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not 
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be 
reported.  
 
 Concerning the falsification allegation here, I am not persuaded that Applicant’s 
failure to disclose the six delinquent accounts when responding to questions in Section 
26 of his security clearance application was deliberate. His explanation that he made an 
honest mistake due to inattention is reasonable. His credibility on that point is bolstered 
by his apparent willingness to discuss his finances, with the aid of a credit report, during 
the August 2017 background investigation.  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
17 AG ¶ 15.  
 
 
6 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .18 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. There is no reliable 
documentary evidence that Applicant has made any forward progress in resolving the 
six charged-off or collection accounts for more than $34,000. His problematic financial 
history suggests he may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and 
safeguarding classified or sensitive information.  
 
 What is missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. There is no 
documentation to establish that he initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to pay 
the delinquent debts. Although his financial problems are connected to a lengthy period 
of unemployment that ended in 2014, I cannot conclude that he has acted responsibly in 
the years since then given the state of the written record. It’s the responsibility of the 
individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of their case. Here, 
Applicant has not met his burden of production because he did not present sufficient 
documentation showing that he is making some sort of effort to resolve his delinquent 
debts.    
  
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
                                                          
18 AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 
 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
