1 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )          ISCR Case No. 17-03098 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline M (use of information 
technology), Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline E (personal conduct). 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 22, 2015. 
On October 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline M, use of information technology, Guideline D, sexual behavior, and Guideline 
E, personal conduct. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) 
implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant provided a three-page response to the SOR on November 16, 2017, 
admitting all of the SOR allegations. Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. On March 22, 
2 
 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for April 11, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) were not available for the hearing.1 However, they 
were provided to Applicant before the hearing in discovery. I left the record open until April 
25, 2018, for Department Counsel to provide the GEs to Applicant, and for Applicant to 
provide any post-hearing documents. He did not object and GE 1 through 3 were later 
admitted into evidence without objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. Applicant submitted two documents post-hearing including a letter from his former 
company indicating that it would not release his personnel record without a subpoena, and 
a strong character reference letter from his current supervisor. These were marked as AE 
A and AE B, respectively, and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on April 25, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact2 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges under Guideline M that in February 2015, Applicant violated his 
employer’s information protection acceptable use policy by viewing and storing indecent 
and sexually explicit images on his company’s computer. A second allegation at SOR ¶ 2.a 
asserts that Applicant was arrested and charged with prostitution in Dallas, Texas in June 
2002. SOR ¶ 2.b cross-alleges that the same putative misconduct under SOR ¶ 1.a raises 
a concern under Guideline D, sexual behavior, as well. SOR ¶ 3.a cross alleges the same 
violation at ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a as concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The basis for 
these allegations is a February 9, 2015 letter of termination from the director of Applicant’s 
company (GE 2), and an FBI criminal history report (GE 3).  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He graduated from high school in 1979 and had some 
college courses, but did not obtain a degree. Tr. 10-12 Applicant was married from 1998 to 
2005 and he had two children from that marriage, currently attending college. He has now 
been remarried for six years. Applicant has been employed as a software developer by a 
federal contractor aboard a military installation since January 2016. Applicant reports no 
military service, and he has held an interim security clearance since January 2016 (Tr. 9-
10.) 
 
Applicant started using his company e-mail account to access dating web sites 
online because he was having marital difficulties. This included storing images on his work 
computer (Tr. 17.) He found out that his current wife was cheating on him and he accessed 
dating websites online out of a desire to retaliate (Tr. 19.) Subsequently, he started 
receiving unsolicited e-mails and pornographic images on his work computer. He never re- 
transmitted these photographs of naked women (Tr. 34- 36.) However, Applicant had taken 
                                                            
1 Department Counsel’s briefcase was sidetracked en route to the hearing. I left the record open for him to 
submit the GEs, which had already been provided in discovery, to Applicant. I also allowed time for Applicant 
to object. He did not raise an objection.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s December 22, 2015 
security clearance application (SCA) (GE 1).  
 
3 
 
computer-security courses and training and he knew that the company prohibited such use 
(Tr. 23.) Applicant did not set out to deliberately download pornographic images onto his 
work computer, but once he inadvertently got onto dating distribution lists, things escalated, 
and he could not control the email traffic (Tr. 21.)  
 
Applicant did not use his own g-mail account because his wife had access to it (Tr. 
35.) He testified that the pornographic images were discovered by his employer because 
an altercation occurred in another section in his workplace, and his employer was sued. 
The attorney in that civil litigation subpoenaed all of the e-mail accounts of supervisors at 
the company, including Applicant’s e-mail account (Tr. 20-21.) Since the company had a 
zero tolerance policy for computer pornography, Applicant was terminated, and he 
remained unemployed for one year (Tr. 24.) He had to withdraw $70,000 from his 401 k 
retirement account to pay living expenses (Tr. 25.) Applicant has never had other problems 
with pornographic materials or been diagnosed with any addiction (Tr. 37.) He went to 
counseling with his wife and they are still together despite some rough patches in their 
marriage (Tr. 37.) Applicant disclosed this termination of his employment on his SCA and 
testified credibly that it will never happen again (Tr. 38.)  
 
Applicant admitted that he was arrested for prostitution in Dallas in 2002, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant testified that he stopped at a service station to fill his automobile 
with gas. Some ladies driving by catcalled to him and then asked Applicant if he would like 
to go someplace and party? (Tr. 26-27) He understood the word party to mean sex and he 
was told the price would be $10. He had to go to the nearby ATM to withdraw the $10 (Tr. 
27.) Applicant was arrested in a sweep by Dallas police. He hired a local attorney who 
advised him to plead guilty and move on with his life (Tr. 28.) Applicant pled no contest and 
he was fined $700 and placed on probation for two years. This was the only time Applicant 
was arrested in his life (Tr. 30.) 
 
                                       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is 
an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing of a number of variables of an 
individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the individual is an acceptable 
security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
       Analysis 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The Concern. Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness 
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. 
Information Technology includes any computer-based, mobile, or wireless 
device used to create, store, access, process, manipulate, protect, or move 
information. This includes any component, whether integrated into a larger 
system or not, such as hardware, software, or firmware, used to enable or 
facilitate these operations.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 40: 
 
          (e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not authorized. 
                                                            
3 AG ¶ 39. 
5 
 
Applicant has admitted in his response to the SOR that he improperly downloaded 
pornography onto his work computer without authorization. This meets the government’s 
burden in establishing application of the above-mentioned disqualifying conditions, and 
shifts the focus to potentially mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 41(a) could potentially mitigate the use of information technology concerns: 
 
so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened    
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
Applicant did not start out intending to download pornographic images into his e-mail 
account on his work computer. Instead, he made the mistake of accessing dating websites 
online, and the situation escalated when he received unsolicited images of naked ladies. 
He did not further disseminate these images. Applicant testified credibly that he is 
remorseful for his actions and he has been punished by this former employer when he was 
terminated and unemployed for one year. He has resolved the friction with his wife and they 
are together and happy. I am convinced that this violation was a onetime lapse in judgment 
and it is not likely to ever recur in the future.  
 
 
GUIDELINE D: SEXUAL BEHAVIOR 
 
The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
 Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior includes 
conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or written 
transmission. No adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline 
may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
Conditions that could potentially raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
are set out in AG ¶ 13 and include: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been  
prosecuted; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment. 
 
Applicant candidly admits that he was arrested for prostitution in a sting operation 
16 years ago. The arrest implicates AG ¶13(a) and 13(d), requiring an examination of 
applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
6 
 
Any sexual behavior security concerns would be mitigated by AG ¶ 14(b):  
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that the allegations of sexual impropriety 
are corroborated, but have been mitigated by the passage of time and no recidivism. 
Applicant is a married father helping two children through college. The risqué e-mails in his 
account were a reaction to his marital distress. The prostitution arrest was for a 
misdemeanor 16 years ago. Thus, the mitigating condition under AG ¶ 13 (b) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
. 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 (f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the 
employer as a condition of employment. 
 
         I find that the evidence and testimony presented, implicate AG ¶16(f). Applicant 
acknowledges having computer training with the company and being aware of his 
company’s zero-tolerance policy for downloading pornography on company 
computers, and he admits to violating it. Moreover, Applicant was terminated by his 
employer for this behavior.  
 
 . Conditions under  AG ¶ 17 that could potent ia l ly  mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
7 
 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
My analysis under adjudicative guidelines M and D above, is the same under 
this this administrative guideline E and is herein incorporated by reference. Applicant 
pled no contest to a misdemeanor charge of prostitution in 2002. He disclosed his 2015 
termination in his SCA. He has been candid and forthright throughout the security 
clearance process. He and his wife had counseling and remain living together. 
Applicant has taken positive steps to repair his marriage and eliminate the stressors 
that caused him to turn to pornography. He had only the one arrest in his 57 years. 
Neither the prostitution arrest or termination from his employment is likely to recur, and 
the mitigating conditions above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines M, D, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has a demonstrated record of over 
20 years of superb service in the workforce as a software developer and project manager.  
He is a father of two children. Most importantly, Applicant disclosed his transgressions in 
the SCA and he is remorseful and determined not to re-commit the security violations 
alleged in the SOR. He has met his burden of persuasion.  
 
8 
 
There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has violated the company’s 
rules, regulations, policies or procedures pertaining to use of information technology, and 
that he was arrested for prostitution 16 years ago. He has met his burden of persuasion. I 
am convinced that these were isolated incidents. The record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has refuted the security concerns arising under Guidelines  
M, D, and E.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:                      For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a: - 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:                        FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:      For Applicant 
 
                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
