 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01564 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On March 25, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
  
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
2 
On July 15, 2017, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she requested 
that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. (Item 4) On September 28, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing ten Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 29, 2017. The FORM 
notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant responded to the FORM on December 8, 2017, and provided documents 
labeled as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-F. The Items submitted by the Government are 
labeled as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. All Exhibits were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The DOHA Office assigned the case to me on February 14, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g and 1.i., and she denied ¶¶ 1.b-1.e, and 
1.h. under Guideline F. Her admissions were incorporated into the findings of fact. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and employed by a Federal government healthcare 
contractor as a coding and document educator since September 2012. She has never 
married. She has two adult children, ages 24 and 20. She is requesting access to 
sensitive information eligibility.2  
 
 Applicant’s tax problems started in 2008 while she was working two jobs. Her 
part-time employer did not deduct taxes from her pay. She then fell behind on current 
tax years because she was repaying taxes owed for previous years. She had state tax 
liens filed against her for 2010 and 2012 unpaid state taxes. She voluntarily relinquished 
her car to the bank in about 2015 after she called them to let them know that she could 
not maintain regular car payments. She attributed her financial difficulties to being a 
single parent financially responsible for her children, recovering from a stroke, and a 
history of low paying jobs.3  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to timely pay three medical accounts (¶¶ 
1.c, 1.h and 1.i), a phone service account (¶ 1.b), a repossessed vehicle deficiency 
balance (¶ 1.a), a speeding ticket (¶ 1.g), and two state tax liens (¶¶ 1.d and 1.e). She 
previously filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005, and her debts were discharged by the 
bankruptcy court in 2006. (¶ 1.f). The total amount of delinquent debt listed in the SOR 
was approximately $12,798.4 The SOR debts are supported by GE 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 GE 10. 
 
4 GE 1. 
 
3 
 Applicant submitted documentation to show that the phone service account was 
successfully disputed. Applicant returned equipment but the phone service creditor did 
not have any record of it. After filing the dispute, the phone service creditor removed the 
account from Applicant’s credit report (¶ 1.b; AE B). The 2012 state tax lien showed a 
balance due of $1,530. (¶ 1.d; AE E). Applicant made a handwritten note on the bottom 
of the circuit court document, however, that “Per tax office Balance 746.36 – current 
payment plan.” Applicant provided court records which showed the 2010 state tax lien 
was satisfied on April 5, 2013. (¶ 1.e; AE D) She also provided proof of payment for the 
speeding ticket and a medical account (¶¶ 1.g, 1.h; AE A and AE C). Applicant’s final 
document (AE F) was a handwritten statement indicating that she was currently in the 
process of setting up a payment plan with the car creditor for the $9,854 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. She was also trying to find the unlisted companies to pay the $75 and $50 
medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i. 
 
 Applicant listed on her April 2015 SCA that she had filed all of her Federal and 
state tax returns, but she had not been able to pay all of the taxes owed. She listed 
owing 2012 Federal taxes in the amount of $4,530, and disclosed that she was currently 
on a repayment plan with the IRS. During her background interview in February 2017, 
Applicant stated that she did not want to have continuing tax problems, so she made 
appropriate changes to her payroll. Due to these changes, Applicant did not owe any 
Federal or state taxes for tax year 2015.5  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG. (Directive, Enclosure 2) These guidelines are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 GE 5, 10. 
 
4 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator or, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to pay state taxes owed for at least tax years 2010 and 2012. 
The 2012 state tax lien is not fully satisfied and she has an additional $9,979 of 
unresolved debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant, as a single parent, experienced unforeseen medical issues, and was 
underemployed. These were conditions beyond her control. She initiated good-faith 
payments and fully resolved two debts. She is investigating two unlisted creditors in 
order to resolve the final two unpaid medical debts in the amount of $50 and $75. She 
has satisfied one tax lien and is currently paying the other tax lien. She is in the process 
of negotiating a repayment plan for her repossessed vehicle. She has not incurred any 
additional delinquent accounts and she is living within her means while repaying her 
debts. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and demonstrated her 
stated intentions to repay all of her debts. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that 
future financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c) and (d) apply. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant successfully disputed one delinquent account, which was removed 
from her credit report. She had returned equipment that was not properly documented 
by the creditor. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s tax issues arose in approximately 2008 after she started working a 
second, part-time job and wrongfully assumed her employer was deducting taxes from 
her wages. She filed all of her tax returns timely, but she fell behind on her state taxes 
due to her repayment of delinquent taxes from a previous year. She has continued 
paying her taxes on a repayment plan and has fully satisfied taxes owed for 2010. She 
is currently paying on the 2012 state tax lien. She corrected the tax payroll issue so that 
she would not owe additional taxes. AG ¶ 20(g) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Beginning in 2008, Applicant experienced tax problems due to her part-time 
employer not deducting taxes from her pay. She filed all of the tax returns, but she did 
not have enough money to pay the taxes in full. Applicant has indicated a willingness to 
continue to repay her debts. She took responsible action by making changes in the 
payroll office to prevent future tax problems. Her positive resolution of one state tax lien, 
continuing payments on the second state tax lien, and the resolution of four debts, it 
shows that Applicant’s financial problems are now under control and currently in the 
process of being resolved. 
 
 
7 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
