 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-03252 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns, but 
he failed to mitigate personal conduct trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On October 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations, and E Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
2 
 
  
On November 1, 2017, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and provided 
additional documentation labeled as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-F. He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
On December 14, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five items, was 
mailed to Applicant on December 21, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM on 
February 5, 2018, and provided documents labeled as (AE) G and H. Government 
Exhibits (GE) items 1 through 5 and AE A-H were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The DOHA Office assigned the case to me on April 9, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, and he denied ¶ 1.g, under Guideline 
F. He admitted ¶ 2.a under Guideline E. His admissions were incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and employed by a Federal government healthcare 
contractor as a surgical technician since July 2016. He has never married. He served  
active duty in the U.S. Navy from October 2005 through October 2010. He received an 
Honorable discharge. He is currently enrolled in college. He is requesting access to 
sensitive information eligibility. (GE 2) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to timely pay a credit union credit card 
account referred for collection in the amount of $7,222 (¶ 1.a). Applicant admitted that 
he was having this debt resolved through a credit counseling company that he joined on 
August 31, 2017. According to AE C, the credit counseling company was able to 
negotiate the amount down to $2,600. The agreement provided that Applicant was to 
make monthly payments on this account beginning in October 2017, with his last 
payment in March 2019. The payments come directly out of Applicant’s paycheck to the 
credit counseling company, who in turn disperses the money to the creditors. (GE 1; AE 
A, C) 
 
 The SOR also alleged an account placed with a collection agency in the amount 
of $5,741 (¶ 1.b). Based on the August 2017 credit report (GE 4), this account remained 
the same when compared to his March 2017 credit report. Applicant has enrolled this 
account with the credit counseling company and the account is still in the negotiation 
process. (GE 4, 5; AE A, F) 
 
 A delinquent car loan account in the amount of $4,193 was admitted by Applicant 
(¶ 1.c). He listed in his Answer that he has made the account current and he continues 
to make monthly payments of $375. He submitted a document showing a $375 payment 
 
3 
was made in September 2017. The creditor statement showed a balance of $3,137.03, 
which reflects a reduction of over $1,000 of the amount alleged in the SOR. (AE A, D) 
 
 The SOR alleged another collection company account in the amount of $654 (¶ 
1.d). Applicant submitted documentation after receipt of the FORM. His e-mail stated 
that the collection company had agreed to a settlement of $491.72. Applicant provided 
documented checking account transactions showing that he paid half of the settlement 
amount in January 2018, and he made the final payment in February 2018. This 
account is now fully resolved (¶ 1.d). (AE G, H) 
 
 There were two accounts that had been placed with collection agencies in the 
amount of $511 (¶ 1.e), and $358 (¶ 1.f). Based on the August 2017 credit report, these 
account balances remained the same when compared to his March 2017 credit report. 
Applicant enrolled these accounts with the credit counseling company in August 2017. 
The $511 account is still in the process of negotiation. Applicant stated that the account 
for $358 was settled in August 2017 in the amount of $322.83. He did not provide 
sufficient documentation to show that this particular account was settled or fully 
resolved. (GE 4, 5; AE A, E, F)  
 
 Applicant denied the last debt alleged in the SOR for $75 (¶ 1.g). It appears to be 
an insurance-related account. Applicant’s Answer reflects that he disputed this debt with 
the credit bureau. He stated that this account has since been removed from his credit 
report, but he did not submit any documentation or the underlying basis of the dispute. 
 
 During Applicant’s April 2017 background interview, he was asked whether he 
had any adverse financial issues to report. Applicant told the investigator that he did not 
have any adverse financial issues, as he also indicated on his SCA. The investigator 
confronted Applicant with several delinquent accounts reflected in his March 2017 credit 
report. Applicant stated that his financial problems started approximately four years ago. 
His indebtedness is due to him living beyond his means and not making wise decisions 
with his credit. (GE 3, 5) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator in early 2017, he had reviewed his current credit 
standing and decided that he wanted to clean it up. He acknowledged the delinquent 
accounts as his responsibility. Applicant did not list all of his delinquent accounts on the 
SCA because he was not aware of some of the listed accounts. There were some 
accounts, however, he knew were delinquent. He claimed those accounts were not 
listed on the SCA due to oversight. Applicant stated that he has not taken any steps 
towards satisfying his debts due to a busy work schedule and not having the opportunity 
to contact his creditors. In his Answer to the SOR, documented in an e-mail dated 
November 3, 2017, Applicant admitted allegation (¶ 2.a). He stated that he was having 
computer problems and clicked through all of the financial questions on the SCA without 
reading them. (GE 1, 2, 3, 5; AE A) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG. (Directive, Enclosure 2) These guidelines are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator or, other 
 
5 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.2 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties four years ago due to living beyond his 
means and making poor financial decisions. His credit reports from his 2017 
investigation reflected seven delinquent accounts totaling $18,754. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted to making poor financial decisions over the years that put him 
in an unfortunate position. In an effort to take control of his credit, he engaged a credit 
counseling company for assistance. He is making payments on two accounts and he 
has paid one, possibly two accounts, alleged in the SOR. The money is automatically 
deducted from his paychecks and then paid to the credit counseling company who then 
makes payments to the creditors. Applicant stated that he successfully disputed a $75 
account, but there is nominal evidence to support his claim. The other two remaining 
unpaid accounts have been placed with the credit counseling company and they are still 
in the negotiation process. He has demonstrated he has made a good-faith effort to 
reform his financial practices. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c) and (d) apply. 
 
 The trustworthiness adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s 
personal debts.3 In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has held that an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off the debts in 
the SOR. He is required to demonstrate that he has an established plan to resolve his 
financial problems and that he has taken significant actions to implement that plan.4 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
7 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant intentionally did not disclose any adverse financial information on his 
SCA, as required. When asked by the investigator whether he had any adverse financial 
issues to report during his April 2017 background interview, he falsely stated he had 
nothing to report. Actually, he was aware that he had some delinquent accounts since 
he checked his credit in early 2017. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(c) are established.   
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 
8 
 Appellant provided inconsistent statements as to why he left off his adverse 
financial issues when he completed the SCA in January 2017. After deliberately omitting 
this fact from his SCA, he again denied having any delinquent accounts when he was 
interviewed by an investigator about three months later. Applicant then admitted in the 
same interview that he had checked his credit in early 2017. He claimed the delinquent 
accounts, which he was fully aware of were not disclosed on the SCA due to oversite. In 
his response to the SOR, he stated that he was having computer issues while filling out 
the SCA, and he “clicked through the questions without reading” them. He cannot 
receive the full mitigating credit of any of the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions because his 
inconsistent statements reflect his lack of credibility. His intentional omissions and false 
statement are recent, serious, and may recur in the future. Personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.         
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Beginning in August 2017, Applicant joined a credit counseling program to bring 
his delinquent debt under control. He did so before he received the SOR. Applicant has 
indicated a willingness to continue to repay his debts. He took responsible action by 
paying off one, possibly two accounts, and he is currently making payments on two 
other accounts. Overall, it appears Applicant’s financial problems are now under control 
and fully in the process of being resolved. He has demonstrated his commitment to 
overcoming his financial difficulties and he has taken steps to establish he is now 
 
9 
financially responsible. He has successfully mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. 
 
 The evidence against his approval of access to sensitive information is more 
persuasive than the evidence supporting approval. Appellant provided inconsistent 
statements about why he failed to disclose his financial delinquencies on his SCA. 
Taken together with his intentional false statement to the investigator during his 
background interview raise grave credibility concerns. Applicant's falsification of the 
security clearance application raised serious questions about his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
