 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03613 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
November 7, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 11, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for April 19, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
 
2 
 
submitted documents that I have marked AE C through H and admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2017. He attended community college for a period 
without earning a degree. He is unmarried with one child.1 
 
 Applicant did not have a stable work history before he obtained his current job. 
He was unemployed from March 2011 to June 2012 and from September 2014 to June 
2015. He did not have medical insurance while he was unemployed. He was unable to 
pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, but the $961 medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.n are duplicate accounts. The 17 non-duplicate debts total about 
$13,300. The debts include $3,467 in child support arrearages; $1,938 for the amount 
due on an auto loan after the car was wrecked; unpaid medical debts totaling about 
$3,650; and 7 miscellaneous debts totaling about $4,500. Applicant admitted owing all 
the debts, with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o-1.r, which he paid. All 
of the debts are listed on at least one credit report.3 
 
 Applicant did not realize he was accruing child support arrearages because he 
was paying the child’s mother directly. A garnishment order from the court went into 
effect in August 2017. He is ordered to pay $922 per month in child support, plus $75 
per month in arrearages. That amount has been garnished from his pay since the order 
went into effect. Applicant had another hearing scheduled for April 27, 2018, during 
which he hoped to have the arrearages reduced.4 
 
 Applicant started repaying his debts after he was hired. He stated that he has 
been “paying them off slowly but surely so not to overextend [him]self too much.” He 
established the following payments toward his delinquent debts: He paid three medical 
debts totaling $60 (SOR ¶¶ 1.p-1.r) in 2016. On November 13, 2017, he paid $124 to 
the collection company for the $552 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. The balance is $427. He 
paid a $100 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.k) and a $69 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.o) in November 
2017. He made additional payments totaling $435 toward his other medical debts in 
November 2017.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 21-23; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 14, 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
3 Tr. at 30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A.   
 
4 Tr. at 15-19, 25-26, 29-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A-D, G.  
 
5 Tr. at 15, 20, 31-32, 37, 41-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A, E, F, H.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that he intends to pay his debts. He has health insurance so he 
should not accrue additional medical bills. He earns a good salary. He is aware that he 
needs to pay his debts in order to obtain and keep a security clearance. He owes the 
IRS about $1,500 for the 2017 tax year. He stated that he set up a payment plan. The 
April 2017 credit report lists him as $1,154 past due on his $344 per month car loan. 
The October 2017 credit report lists him as $972 past due on the car loan. Applicant 
stated that he fell behind on the car loan when the transmission needed to be repaired, 
but he caught up with the payments and is now current.6  
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2017. He reported a delinquent credit card debt with an estimated balance of 
$800, but he did not report any other delinquent debts. He denied intentionally falsifying 
the financial questions on the SF 86. He stated that he did not look at a credit report, 
and he was unaware of the extent of his financial problems.7  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 27, 37, 40, 47-49, 53; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. The SOR did not allege the tax debt or 
the past-due auto loan. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application 
of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
7 Tr. at 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant reported a delinquent credit card debt with an estimated balance of 
$800 on his SF 86, but he did not report any other delinquent debts. He denied 
intentionally falsifying the financial questions on the SF 86. He stated that he did not 
look at a credit report, and he was unaware of the extent of his financial problems. 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally falsified the 
SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are attributable to his employment issues and 
medical bills when he did not have health insurance. Those events were beyond his 
control. He started repaying his debts after he was hired. His child support and 
arrearages (SOR ¶ 1.a) are being garnished from his pay. He paid the medical debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.o through 1.r. He made additional payments totaling $435 
toward his other medical debts, and he paid $124 to the collection company for the 
$552 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. The debts that are paid or being paid, which includes 
the medical debts, are mitigated.  
 
 Applicant stated that he has been paying his debts off “slowly but surely so not to 
overextend [him]self too much.” He has paid about $750 toward his child support 
arrearages and about $800 toward his other debts. However, he owes the IRS about 
$1,500 for his 2017 taxes, and he fell several months behind on a car loan. The total 
amount owed in past-due debts has not appreciably changed in spite of his payments. 
  
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay all his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Applicant may reach a point where his finances are sufficiently in order to 
warrant a security clearance, but he is not there at this time. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable to the 
debts addressed above. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n-1.r:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
