 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-00306 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his personal conduct, his 
financial problems, his use of alcohol, and his alcohol-related and other criminal conduct. 
His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On September 17, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for a security clearance required 
for his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On March 15, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline for financial considerations 
(Guideline F), alcohol consumption (Guideline G), criminal conduct (Guideline J), and 
personal conduct (Guideline E).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on January 24, 2018, and convened the requested hearing on 
March 7, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 - 12. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant also 
proffered Applicant Exhibits (AX) A and B. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I 
held the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant time to submit additional relevant 
information. The record closed on March 30, 2018, when I received Applicant’s timely 
post-hearing submissions (AX C and D)3 and Department Counsel’s waiver of objections. 
I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that, as of March 2017, Applicant 
owed $5,523 for 17 past-due or delinquent debts (SOR 1.a – 1.q); and that he filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions in February 2016 (SOR 1.r), June 2005 (later converted 
to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy) (SOR 1.s), and October 1996 (SOR 1.t). In response, he 
admitted each of these allegations. As to SOR 1.a – 1.q, Applicant asserted a positive 
defense that he had initiated a good-faith effort to repay those debts. (Answer; Tr. 13 – 
15) The allegations under this guideline are further supported by GX 1, GX 2, and GX 9 
– 12.   
 
 Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant consumed alcohol, at 
times to excess, from 1983 until at least August 2015 (SOR 2.a); that in 1984, he was 
charged with driving under the influence (DUI) for which his driver’s license was 
suspended for one year (SOR 2.b); that in August 1998, he was arrested for felony DUI, 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. My decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are identified and admitted as follows: AX C consists of a single-
page handwritten statement, an amended response to the SOR, correspondence from a creditor regarding 
an unalleged delinquent debt that Applicant resolved in February 2018, and copies of his last 13 monthly 
bank statements for the period December 2016 through February 2018. AX D consists of three character 
reference letters and associated email correspondence regarding a letter forwarded directly from the author 
to Department Counsel. 
 
 
3 
 
 
child endangerment with intoxication, and resisting arrest. He was convicted of DUI and 
given a 12-month suspended jail sentence, placed on probation, ordered to complete 
community service and attend DUI school, and had his license suspended for a year 
(SOR 2.c); and that in August 2015, after trying to strangle someone while he was 
intoxicated, he was admitted for inpatient detoxification. At that time, Applicant allegedly 
was diagnosed with alcohol withdrawal syndrome with a fair prognosis, and did not follow 
medical advice to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) (SOR 2.d). In response, Applicant 
admitted, with explanations, each allegation. These allegations are further supported by 
GX 1 – 5, and GX 7. 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government alleged as criminal conduct the alcohol-related 
arrests described in SOR 2.b and 2.c (SOR 3.a). It was further alleged that in 1986 or 
1987, Applicant was charged with and convicted of driving on a revoked license, for which 
he was sentenced to three days in jail and the revocation of his license was extended for 
an additional year (SOR 3.b); that in December 1998, he was charged with domestic 
violence-assault, which was later dismissed (SOR 3.c); that in August 2013, Applicant 
was charged with felony domestic assault and vandalism, both dismissed after he paid 
restitution and court costs. Applicant was ordered to have no further contact with the 
assault victim (SOR 3.d). In response, Applicant admitted these allegations. They are 
further supported by GX 1 – 6. 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged as adverse personal conduct the 
criminal offenses described in SOR 3.a – 3.d (SOR 4.a). It was further alleged that in 
January 2016, Applicant’s access to classified information, as well as to DOD unclassified 
information systems was suspended after Applicant asked a supervisor to co-sign an 
automobile loan, and after Applicant borrowed money from co-workers. After initially 
denying those allegations during a company investigation, Applicant admitted having 
done so. (SOR 4.b) Finally, it was alleged that Applicant deliberately provided false 
answers to e-QIP Section 26 questions about his finances when he omitted the delinquent 
or past-due debts described at SOR 1.a – 1.o (SOR 4.c). In response, Applicant admitted 
SOR 4.a and 4.b, but denied SOR 4.c, claiming he was unaware of the debts, having 
relocated from his marital residence. SOR 4.a and 4.b are also supported by GX 1 – 3, 
GX 5 and GX 6.  
 
 In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions and the Government 
information cited above, I make the following additional findings of fact. Applicant is 54 
years old. After high school, he attended two technical schools between 1982 and 1990, 
receiving diplomas and certifications as an electrician. Since 2016, he has worked as an 
electrician for a defense contractor who is sponsoring his current request for clearance. 
He has worked for federal contractors since 2006, and first applied for a security 
clearance in June 2007. He has been employed by different federal contractors at the 
same location as the contract for that work has changed hands. He reapplied for 
clearances in October 2013 and September 2015. (GX 1 – 3) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant has been married twice. His first marriage began in January 1987 and 
ended by divorce in July 2006. Applicant has three adult children from that marriage. He 
remarried in September 2015, but divorced his second wife in December 2017. (GX 1; Tr. 
56) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in October 1996 because he 
and his first wife did not manage their finances responsibly. Applicant was 33 years old 
at the time. A wage earner repayment plan was successfully completed in February 2002. 
(AX B; Tr. 59 – 60, 63) 
 
 In June 2005, Applicant again filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. He filed 
in response to the costs of his first divorce and unexpected child support obligations. In 
February 2006, it was determined he could not afford the payments required under the 
approved wage earner plan. The bankruptcy petition was converted to a Chapter 7 and 
Applicant was discharged of his debts in June 2006. (AX B; Tr. 60 - 62) 
 
 Most recently, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in April 2016. The 
approved wage earners plan requires him to pay $350 directly from his pay every week 
until 2021. Applicant explained that he filed after his second wife ran up unnecessary bills, 
and because he incurred unplanned living expenses when they separated. In June 2017, 
after he received the SOR, Applicant amended the Chapter 13 petition to include most of 
the debts alleged in the SOR. This Chapter 13 petition remained active and in good 
standing as of the hearing in this matter. In addition to completing mandatory on-line 
financial counseling as a prerequisite to filing for bankruptcy, a longtime friend of 
Applicant has been helping him manage his finances and communicate with creditors for 
much of the past year. She testified that Applicant’s second wife was not responsible with 
their finances, that Applicant has reduced his expenses now that he is divorced, and that 
he is better able to avoid financial pitfalls. (AX A – C; Tr. 57 – 59, 62 – 63, 75 – 80) 
 
 Applicant began using alcohol when he was about 18 years old. As alleged at SOR 
2.b, he was first arrested for DUI in April 1984, when he was 21 years old. Applicant 
testified that he had about four beers at a party before he got behind the wheel that night. 
His license was suspended as part of the disposition of that charge. (AX B; Tr. 66 – 67) 
 
 As alleged at SOR 2.c, he was again arrested for DUI in August 1998, at age 35, 
while he had two of his three minor children in the car. Applicant testified he had 
consumed about three or four beers when his first wife, from whom he had separated, 
called and demanded he come get the children from her or she would simply leave them 
where they were. Applicant felt he had no choice and picked the children up at his ex-
wife’s house. On his way home, police pulled him over and arrested him for DUI. When 
they tried to handcuff Applicant, he resisted, wrestling one officer to the ground before 
being subdued and transported to jail. Applicant was given a suspended jail sentence and 
placed on supervised probation. (AX B; Tr. 43 – 45) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 As alleged at SOR 2.d, in August 2015, at age 52, Applicant self-referred to 
inpatient treatment for alcohol detoxification. He had attempted to strangle or assault his 
second wife while both of them were intoxicated. Medical records from Applicant’s 
treatment show he suffers from chronic alcoholism, and it was recommended that he 
engage in follow up counseling through AA or some other structured approach to his 
alcohol abuse. Applicant testified that he last used alcohol during the event that lead to 
his hospitalization, and that he only consumed about four beers on that occasion. I found 
Applicant’s testimony about his use of alcohol since 2015, and in general, to be evasive 
and less than credible. His answers to questions about his relationship with alcohol are 
best characterized as an attempt to minimize the severity of his problems with alcohol. 
For example, Applicant claims that he has not consumed alcohol to excess since he was 
25 years old. This is in direct contradiction to the observations of medical professionals 
when Applicant was admitted for detoxification in 2015. (AX B; Tr. 39 – 42, 66, 69 – 71) 
 
 As alleged at SOR 3.b, Applicant was arrested for driving on a suspended driver’s 
license in 1987. His license had been revoked following his first DUI arrest (see SOR 2.b). 
He was approved to drive to work, but when he was pulled over on this occasion, he was 
taking his pregnant wife to a doctor’s appointment. (AX B; Tr. 52 – 53) 
 
 As alleged at SOR 3.c, Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic 
violence-assault. The charges were later dismissed. Applicant was on probation for his 
August 1998 DUI (see SOR 2.c) at the time. (AX B; Tr. 51 – 52) 
 
 In August 2013, as alleged at SOR 3.d, Applicant was charged with domestic 
assault and vandalism. He claims he had gone to an ex-girlfriend’s house uninvited and 
in the course of trying to get her to come to the door, he broke a window. Applicant also 
has claimed that he broke the window accidentally; however, contemporaneous 
information in a JPAS report indicated that, when police arrived, he was banging on the 
victim’s door and acting in a manner that made the ex-girlfriend (who had told him she 
did not want to see him) fear for her safety. The charges were dismissed on condition that 
Applicant make restitution and have no further contact with the ex-girlfriend. (AX B; Tr. 48 
– 50) 
 
 Applicant has applied for a security clearance on at least two prior occasions. He 
submitted e-QIPs in 2007 and 2013. When he submitted his most recent e-QIP in 2015, 
he disclosed some of his earlier arrests, as well as his 2015 alcohol treatment. He did not 
disclose any of the debts listed in the SOR. In response to the allegation at SOR 4.c, that 
he intentionally omitted that information, Applicant averred that he was unaware of those 
debts because he had moved out of the house when he and his second wife separated. 
He further acknowledged, however, that he knew he should have obtained a credit report 
before completing the e-QIP. After receiving the SOR, Applicant amended his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition to include the debts listed in the SOR. (AX A; AX B; Tr. 33 – 34) 
 
 In January 2016, while Applicant’s current request for a security clearance was 
pending, his access to classified information was suspended. A Joint Personnel 
 
 
6 
 
 
Adjudications System (JPAS) report stated he had asked a supervisor to co-sign 
Applicant’s application for a new car loan. It was also reported that Applicant had asked 
a co-worker to loan him money. During a company investigation into these allegations, 
Applicant initially denied them but later admitted his misconduct. At hearing, Applicant 
claimed he had called his team leader from the car dealership where he was shopping 
for a new vehicle about getting his team leader’s personal information to use in a loan 
application. Applicant stated he did not go through with that request. As to borrowing 
money from a co-worker, in response to the SOR, Applicant described that as a wedding 
gift from a fellow employee. (AX B; Tr. 53 – 57) 
 
 Applicant insists that his current finances are sound. He provided copies of bank 
statements dating back to December 2016 to show that he has not been overdrawn during 
that period. As to his use of alcohol, Applicant claims all of his bad conduct and abuse of 
alcohol occurred in his “younger days.” He insists he has changed his circumstances for 
the better now that he is no longer in a bad marriage. He no longer drinks to excess and 
he tries to live a responsible lifestyle. This was supported by the testimony of his witness, 
a longtime friend who has observed positive changes in his appearance and behavior 
since Applicant divorced from his second wife. A co-worker and a superintendent from 
Applicant’s current place of employment, who have worked with Applicant since 2016, 
view Applicant as reliable, professional, and attentive to his work. (AX C; AX D; Tr. 75 – 
83) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 Applicant’s use of alcohol reasonably raised the security concern articulated at AG 
¶ 21: 
 
  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶ 
22 disqualifying conditions:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed. 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related misconduct over the past 30 years. He 
has been arrested for DUI and, most recently, checked himself in for detoxification 
treatment after getting drunk and attempting to choke or assault someone in a domestic 
setting. Medical records show that he has a history of alcoholism, and treating physicians 
recommended he attend AA. Applicant did not follow their advice.  
 
 I also have considered the following AG ¶ 23 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant has not produced sufficient, credible information on which to base 
application of any of these mitigating conditions. To the contrary, he claimed he had not 
consumed alcohol to excess since his 20s; yet, as recently as 2015, at age 52, he 
presented for inpatient detoxification as a chronic abuser of alcohol. Applicant’s witness 
testified she has observed positive changes in Applicant since the end of his second 
marriage, but her testimony did not establish that Applicant lives a sober lifestyle. 
Applicant himself was, in my view, evasive regarding his current use of alcohol. He did 
not follow medical advice to attend AA, and he has not engaged in any reliable approach 
to maintaining sobriety. When asked how much alcohol he had consumed in connection 
with any of the alcohol-related events alleged in the SOR, Applicant replied with the same 
number – three or four beers. The intake assessment for Applicant’s detox treatment cited 
at least two 40-ounce beers as Applicant’s daily consumption before being admitted. All 
 
 
9 
 
 
of this suggests Applicant lacks insight into his alcohol problem, as well as a level of denial 
on his part. Available information does not support any of the AG ¶ 23 mitigating 
conditions, and the security concerns about Applicant’s use of alcohol remain unresolved.  
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government established that Applicant has experienced financial difficulties 
since his early 30s. To resolve his delinquent debts, Applicant has resorted to bankruptcy 
protection three times. As of the date of the SOR, in addition to an ongoing Chapter 13 
petition, Applicant also owed about $5,500 in delinquent debt that was not initially 
included in his 2016 petition. All of the foregoing reasonably raises a security concern 
about Applicant’s finances that is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the following 
AG ¶ 19 disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcies in 1996 and 2016 arose from his inability to manage his 
household finances. Available information shows that, over the past 20 years, Applicant 
has been unable to prudently manage his finances in a way that would indicate sound 
judgment and reliability. I also have considered the following pertinent mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
10 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and 
ongoing, and have recurred over a long period of time. I considered AG ¶ 20(c) in the 
context of his friend’s testimony that she is assisting Applicant in resolving his debts and 
in dealing with his creditors. While this is positive information, in light of Applicant’s long 
history of debt and bankruptcy, it is far too soon to conclude that his financial problems 
are under control. 
 
 As to AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy arose from his first divorce and 
invokes the first prong of that mitigating condition. Full application of this AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not possible, because Applicant’s financial problems recurred. In conjunction with my 
consideration of AG ¶ 20(d), I conclude Applicant’s repeated resort to bankruptcy 
protection does not constitute responsible action in response to financial problems. Nor 
does it support his claim that he initiated prompt, good-faith efforts to pay or otherwise 
resolve his debts. Applicant did not show that he has embarked on a systematic, reliable 
effort to improve his financial management in a way that inspires some confidence that 
he will not experience financial problems in the future. Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns about his finances. 
  
 
 
11 
 
 
Criminal Conduct 
  
 Applicant has a history of criminal conduct that began when he was about 21 years 
old and continued until he was about 50 years old. This information reasonably raises a 
security concern that is articulated at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Available information further requires application of the following AG ¶ 31 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
I also have considered the following AG ¶ 32 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last instance of criminal conduct was in 2013. Despite his claims that 
his misconduct occurred when he was younger, he was 50 years old when he was 
arrested in 2013, and he was 35 when he was arrested in 1998. Some of Applicant’s 
criminal conduct was alcohol-related. For the same reasons I concluded he did not show 
rehabilitation regarding alcohol, I conclude he has not shown rehabilitation with respect 
to his criminal conduct. The security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated. 
  
 
 
12 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s history of criminal conduct also 
reasonably raised a broader security concern about Applicant’s overall judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. For most of his adult life, he has placed himself in 
situations that put himself and others at risk. Additionally, Applicant exhibited poor 
judgment and a lack of discretion when he borrowed money from a co-worker, and when 
he tried to get a supervisor to help him obtain a loan for the purchase of a new car. 
 
 The Government also cited Applicant’s allegedly intentional omission of several 
past-due or delinquent debts when he submitted his most recent e-QIP. To be 
disqualifying, such conduct must have been taken with intent to deceive or mislead the 
Government.8 My assessment of available information probative of Applicant’s intent in 
this regard shows he did not so intend. Applicant had disclosed other unrelated adverse 
information in his e-QIP, and he had disclosed adverse financial information in previous 
e-QIPs. In this instance, Applicant provided a plausible explanation for his omissions; 
namely, that he had relocated around the time his marriage ended and did not have notice 
of some of the debts left from that marriage. He has since included those debts in his 
most recent Chapter 13 bankruptcy and there appears to be no reason why he would not 
have included them in the first place had he known about them. SOR 4.c is resolved for 
Applicant. 
 
Nonetheless, the Government provided sufficient information to support SOR 4.a 
and 4.b, thus establishing the security concern articulated, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c): 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information. 
                                                 
8 See AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Applicant’s repeated instances of criminal conduct over the past 20 years, and his 
lack of discretion in the workplace as a means to resolve his financial challenges 
undermine confidence in Applicant’s judgment. His conduct in the workplace was of 
sufficient concern that his employer suspended Applicant’s access to classified 
information and to unclassified information systems. When confronted with his employer’s 
concerns, Applicant tried to deny it.  
 
Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 17, only AG ¶ 17(c) is pertinent to this 
case: 
 
the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
As to Applicant’s conduct in the workplace, it was recent, occurring less than two 
years ago. Additionally, it was related to his long history of poor management of his 
personal finances, which themselves remain a security concern. Because Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns about his criminal conduct, I conclude he also has not 
mitigated the related, broader concerns about his poor judgment and inability or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and procedures. Available information does not show that 
Applicant’s poor decision making will not recur. On balance, he has not mitigated the 
security concerns under this guideline. 
 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant presented positive recommendations from two current coworkers, 
and the testimony of his witness showed there has been improvement personally and 
financially in Applicant’s circumstances. Nonetheless, not enough time has passed to 
have sufficient confidence that Applicant is suitable for continued access to sensitive 
information. The record evidence as a whole leaves me with doubts that Applicant’s 
problems with alcohol, money, and overall personal conduct are behind him. Because 
protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, 
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.d: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a – 4.b: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 4.c:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
