 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02885 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 30, 2016. On 
September 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 3, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 23, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018. On February 7, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for February 28, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 
1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not 
present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept 
the record open until March 31, 2018, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He 
timely submitted AX A through G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on March 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 
1.g-1.q, 1.s, and 1.u. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.r, and 1.t. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old training systems operator employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from June 
2006 to March 2014, when he was involuntarily discharged, with an honorable discharge, 
because of failure to meet physical fitness standards. He married in June 2009 and has 
a seven-year-old son. (Tr. 18.) He held a security clearance in the Navy and retained it 
as an employee of a defense contractor. 
 
 Applicant had not experienced fitness problems until 2013, when he failed to meet 
the Navy’s weight standards. (Tr. 55.) He was notified in late 2013 that he would be 
discharged for failure to meet fitness requirements. He received $14,000 in severance 
pay. (Tr. 53.) He was unemployed until April 2015, when he was hired for a job that paid 
only about $1,200 per month. (Tr. 43.) When he was hired by his current employer in 
November 2015, his annual pay increased to about $55,000. (Tr. 49.) In September 2016, 
his employer began working on a new contract and Applicant’s duty station was changed 
to a location that requires a commute of about two and a half hours each way, causing 
him to incur fuel expenses of $600-$800 per month. (Tr. 51-52.)  
 
 Applicant’s wife is employed as a certified nursing assistant. (Tr. 21.) Their 
combined family income is between $3,500 and $4,000 per month. (Tr. 22.) Applicant is 
currently enrolled at a community college, pursuing an associate’s degree in information 
technology. When he is in school, he receives a GI Bill housing stipend of about $1,200 
per month.  
 
Applicant’s wife recently suffered a neck injury at work and was unable to work for 
a short period. She returned to work in February 2018 but was restricted to light duty. She 
incurred copayments for physical therapy and medications. The record does not reflect 
whether she lost any pay as a result of her injury. (Tr. 45; AX E; AX F.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s son suffers from scoliosis. Most of his treatment is covered by 
insurance, but each treatment incurs a copayment of $20 or $40 about four times a year. 
His son requires special braces that have been replaced three times as his son grows. 
Applicant has paid $500-$600 for each set of braces. (Tr. 18-19; AX D; AX G.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling about $40,000, which are reflected 
in credit reports from September 2016 and August 2017. (GX 2 and 3.) The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: default judgment for $18,698 filed in January 2015, for an 
automobile repossession deficiency. The vehicle was purchased in 2011, and 
Applicant was unable to make the payments after he was discharged. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c: unsecured loans charged off for $3,359 and $2,751. 
Applicant made payments on these loans by military allotment until he was discharged. 
Since his discharge, he has not contacted the creditors or attempted to resolve the debts. 
(Tr. 25-27.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: cellphone account placed for collection of $1,499. Applicant 
admitted this debt in his answer to the SOR, but he testified that it was incurred when he 
disconnected a Wi-Fi device on his cellphone, but it continued to transmit data, for which 
he was charged. He discussed the charges with the service provider several times, but 
he has not disputed the debt with the original creditor, collection agency, or credit bureau. 
(Tr. 28.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: collection account for $1,304. At the hearing, Applicant was unable 
to provide any information about this debt. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: indebtedness to Department of Veterans Affairs placed for 
collection of $913. This debt was incurred by overpayment of educational benefits and 
was paid by diverting a tax refund. (Tr. 29.) It is reflected in the September 2016 credit 
report as a paid collection. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h: charge accounts charged off for $776 and $688. Applicant 
stopped making payments on these accounts because he could not afford them. He has 
not contacted these creditors or made any attempt to resolve these debts. (Tr. 31.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.k: unsecured loans from a credit union charged off for $639, 
$609, and $590. Applicant contacted the credit union but was unable to reach any 
payment agreements. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: medical debt placed for collection of $542. This debt was incurred 
when Applicant went to an emergency room for reasons not reflected in the record. He 
has not contacted the creditor or made any effort to resolve this debt. (Tr. 33.) 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n: loan placed for collection of $378 and medical debt 
placed for collection of $50. Applicant could not provide any information about these 
debts at the hearing. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o: vacuum cleaner purchase placed for collection of $3,286. 
Applicant could not afford the payments after his discharge. He contacted the creditor, 
who was not interested in any payment arrangements. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p: cable-service debt placed for collection of $899. Applicant testified 
that he was unaware of this debt, incurred at a previous duty station. He has not contacted 
the creditor or made any effort to resolve this debt. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q: telecommunications debt placed for collection of $514. This debt 
was for a cellphone. Applicant has not contacted the creditor or made any effort to resolve 
this debt. (Tr. 37-38.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.r: cable-service debt placed for collection of $439. Applicant denied 
this debt. He reestablished his account after a move and is a current customer of the 
provider. He does not know why his previous account is reflected on his credit report as 
delinquent. He has not contacted the provider or disputed the debt. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.t: federal tax debt of $1,754 for tax year 2014. This debt was incurred 
when Applicant made an early withdrawal from his retirement account. (Tr. 42.) The debt 
was satisfied by applying the federal tax refund for a subsequent tax year. (AX B.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.s: medical debt placed for collection of $306. Applicant did not 
recognize the debt at the hearing, but he had not contacted the creditor or taken any 
action to resolve it. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.u: unpaid traffic ticket for $570 (failure to stop for school bus). 
Applicant disagreed with the violation and was scheduled to appear in court. He was 
unable to attend the court hearing on the scheduled date. He testified that he contacted 
the court and was informed that he would be required to pay the amount of the fine ahead 
of time in order to reschedule his hearing. He has taken no action to resolve the ticket. 
(Tr. 43-45.)  
  
 In October 2017, Applicant retained an attorney to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition. (SOR Answer; AX A.) His attorney will not file the petition until her $1,800 fee is 
paid. Applicant hoped to generate sufficient funds to pay her fee within two months, but 
he presented evidence of only one $100 payment. (Tr. 46; AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
5 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
 
6 
 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, ongoing, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. The uninsured medical expenses incurred by 
Applicant’s family members were conditions largely beyond his control. Applicant has not 
established that his involuntary discharge from the Navy and subsequent periods of 
unemployment and underemployment were conditions beyond his control. He served on 
active duty from 2006 to 2013, with no issues about his weight. He provided no medical 
evidence or other explanation showing that his weight gain in 2013 was beyond his 
control. In any event, he has not acted responsibly. He had ample warning of his 
impending discharge from the Navy, but he presented no evidence showing that he 
prepared for the financial impact of his discharge. For the most part, his response to his 
delinquent debts has been passive. He has not contacted the creditors regarding the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.h, 1.l-1.n, 1.p-1.r, 1.s, or 1.u or made any effort to 
resolve them. He has contacted a bankruptcy attorney, but he has made only one $100 
payment toward her fee of $1,800, and date for filing the bankruptcy petition is uncertain. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant presented no evidence of financial 
counseling and his financial situation is not under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.t, but not for 
the other debts. Even if Applicant follows through with a bankruptcy petition, a bankruptcy 
discharge does not constitute a good-faith effort resolve debts. See ISCR Case No. 11-
08274 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013). 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. At the hearing, Applicant questioned the legitimacy 
of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.r, and 1.u, but he has taken no action to dispute 
them.  
 AG ¶ 20(g) is established for the federal tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t. It is not 
relevant to the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.t:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.u:     Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
