 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 18-00024 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
   For Government: Tara A. Karoian, Esquire 
                                           For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).1 In responses transmitted on 
March 1, 2018, and March 6, 2018, respectively, he admitted the two allegations raised 
and requested a determination based on the written record. On March 26, 2018, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with six attachments (“Items”). 
The case was assigned to me on May 17, 2018. Based on my review of the case file 
and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant is 38 years old and has been employed by the same government 
contractor as a test specialist since May 2014. He was granted an industrial security 
clearance in December 2014. Applicant has earned a General Educational 
Development certificate (GED) and an associate’s degree from a technical institute. 
Applicant is married. He has one minor child and two minor stepchildren.  
 
 In March 2017, Applicant attended a party with two friends. Drinking beer, 
Applicant became intoxicated. As the evening progressed, one of his friends produced a 
vapor pen that contained THC Oil in it.2 The friend is a legal user of the drug. (FORM, 
Item 6, at 2) Applicant knew the oil was a derivative of marijuana. When offered to use 
the drug, Applicant accepted, and smoked off the pen multiple times throughout the 
night. He does not remember how it affected him due to his intoxication, and he does 
not recall how many times he used the vapor pen. He concedes it was a “bad decision 
on his part that affected his employment . . . because a few days later he had to submit 
to a random drug screening.” (FORM, Item 6, at 2)  
 
 The results of the screening reflected a positive reading for marijuana. Applicant 
was suspended for three months with pay, required to attend a three-day education 
course with a counselor, and provide six random drug screenings throughout the rest of 
the year. Applicant was not referred for additional counseling and he was not deemed to 
be a drug abuser. He has completed these requirements. 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana or any related drugs since the party last year. 
He has never been involved in the purchase, sale, manufacture, or distribution of any 
illegal drugs. Applicant has “no future intent to use any illegal drugs to include those 
legally obtained by other people.” (FORM, Item 6, at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
2 See, e.g., https://madebyhemp.com/difference-cbd-thc-cannabis-marijuana-oil (“THC oil, marijuana oil, 
and cannabis oil are generally associated with the same product. . . . With the help of alcohol, this oil is 
made by extracting the resin of the female marijuana plant. . . . The resin dissolves in alcohol and then 
the alcohol evaporates. . . . This type of oil is illegal because of the high levels of THC.”)   
 
 
 
 
3 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under the 
AG, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national interest. In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under the Directive, an “applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. Such use also raised questions about a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant admitted that he used a marijuana derivative in March 2017 at a 
party. This occurred only last year, approximately two-and-a-half years after he was 
granted an industrial security clearance. These facts are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(a): 
any substance misuse, AG ¶ 25(b): testing positive for an illegal drug, and ¶ 25(f): any 
illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive 
position. The Government’s substantial evidence, as confirmed by Applicant’s own 
admissions, raises security concerns under Guideline H. Therefore, the burden shifts to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate related security 
concerns.  
 
Under Guideline H, conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
drug involvement and substance misuse are enumerated. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and   
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Regarding AG ¶ 26(a), Applicant’s marijuana use occurred under mundane 
circumstances and the incident was recent (March 2017). Indeed, the incident was so 
recent as to yet sustain doubts regarding Applicant’s current good judgment despite the 
apparent infrequency of his drug use. Moreover, Applicant’s use of marijuana while 
intoxicated raises question as to his ability to monitor his behavior with relationship to 
the drug while imbibing. Consequently, AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
As for AG ¶ 26(b), Applicant acknowledges his prohibited use of marijuana. He 
expressed his intent not to use marijuana or use any illegal drugs, to include those 
legally obtained by others, in the future. However, he failed to provide any additional 
information regarding his continued association with the friends who accompanied him 
to the March 2017 party; his continued attendance at gatherings where the use of 
marijuana is condoned; his ability to sustain abstinence for more than one year; or his 
readiness to offer a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply given the 
limited facts offered. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s drug use, I considered factors 
such as his age, profession, educational attainments, past employment, and lifestyle.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
This is not a situation involving youthful indiscretion. Applicant was in his mid-
30s, had earned an associate’s degree, and had maintained a security clearance for 
over two years when he succumbed to the temptation to use a marijuana derivative. 
Although the limited facts do not specifically show that Applicant knew marijuana use 
was antithetical to the maintenance of a security clearance, he had sufficient notice that 
drug use was an issue when he completed his security clearance application.  
 
To his credit, Applicant has successfully completed the rehabilitative 
requirements mandated by his employer. Only about a year, however, has passed since 
Applicant used marijuana while maintaining a security clearance. There has barely been 
sufficient time for him to demonstrate his commitment to remaining abstinent. Most 
importantly here, however, there has been insufficient time to reestablish the level of 
trustworthiness and reliability expected by the U.S. Government of one maintaining a 
security clearance. In light of the above, I find that Applicant failed to provide adequate 
evidence to mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
