                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08588 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lonzer Tynes, Sr., COL (Ret.) USAF,  
Personal Representative 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct is mitigated by the passage of time and his change 
of lifestyle. During the last four years he has become a responsible father and good 
worker. His current behavior shows reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 2, 2007, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
May 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as modified and 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On June 9, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 6, 2009. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on August 27, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
presented one witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 3, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old warehouse clerk II working for a defense contractor. 
He graduated from high school in 2003. He is engaged to be married to the mother of 
his three children, ages 4, 3, and 18 months.  
 
In August 2004, at age 19, Applicant pawned a karaoke machine he knew was 
stolen. He was initially charged with Grand Larceny. He was found guilty of Petit 
Larceny, and sentenced, in part, to 180 days jail (suspended). In October 2004, 
Applicant was found guilty and fined for driving his girlfriend’s car without a driver’s 
license.  
 
In February 2005, at age 19, Applicant and two of his friends strong-armed a 
convenience store clerk and stole beer and other merchandise. He was convicted of 
Petit Larceny and sentenced to 180 days jail (170 days suspended). He served 6 days 
in jail and paid a fine. In April 2005, Applicant was charged with illegal possession of 
approximately one ounce of marijuana. He claimed a friend gave him the marijuana to 
hold for a couple of days. A police officer found the marijuana during a search of 
Applicant’s girlfriend’s car and Applicant admitted it was his marijuana. The charge was 
dismissed pursuant to a first time offender diversion program. Applicant paid a fine, was 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) directed application of revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines in all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and 
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 
1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
placed on one-year probation, and was required to complete a drug counseling 
program. 
 
Since April 2005, Applicant has changed his lifestyle. While on probation, he was 
required to stay away from the bad influence of his drug-using friends to avoid 
revocation of his probation. Since then, most of these friends have left the area and he 
no longer associates with drug users. In September 2008, Applicant was diagnosed with 
congestive heart failure and has been required to take medications. Because of his 
diagnosis, Applicant no longer uses illegal drugs or consumes alcoholic beverages.  
 
Applicant became engaged to the mother of his three children in December 
2008. He has become a responsible father to his children and a family man. Applicant 
attends church with his family and believes his participation in church activities keeps 
him grounded. He has been successfully working for a government contractor since 
March 2005. He is considered to be a good worker and has been promoted. Applicant 
believes he will be promoted to a supervisory position if he is granted access to 
classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He promised that his 
questionable behavior will not happen again. He disclosed all of his questionable 
behavior on his security clearance application and in a sworn statement to a 
government investigator. I find he was candid and forthcoming at his hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
4 
 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism.  
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 From August 2004 to April 2005, Applicant committed four offenses, three of 
which were serious. His behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find that AG ¶¶ 32 (a) and (d) 
apply. Applicant’s last offense was in February 2005. He successfully completed all the 
terms of his probation and participated in drug counseling. There is no evidence to show 
Applicant has been involved in any further questionable behavior.  
 
After February 2005, Applicant changed his lifestyle. He no longer associates 
with drug-using friends and avoids any bad influence from friends. Furthermore, 
Applicant no longer uses illegal drugs or consumes alcoholic beverages. Applicant 
became engaged to the mother of his three children in December 2008. He has become 
a responsible father and participates in church activities. He has been successful 
working for a government contractor since March 2005. He is considered to be a good 
worker and has been promoted. Applicant believes he will be promoted to a supervisory 
position if he is granted access to classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his past behavior. He promised that his 
questionable behavior will not happen again. He was candid and forthcoming 
throughout the security clearance process. I find Applicant has learned his lesson and is 
rehabilitated. The Guideline J security concern is mitigated. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who has 
matured during the last four years. Since April 2005, Applicant has changed his lifestyle. 
He has been successful working for a defense contractor. He no longer associates with 
or is influenced by drug users. Furthermore, Applicant no longer uses illegal drugs or 
consumes alcoholic beverages. Applicant has become a responsible father, and 
participates in church activities with his family. He has been candid and forthcoming 
throughout the security clearance process. Applicant expressed remorse for his 
questionable behavior and is resolute about avoiding similar behavior. These factors 
show responsibility, good judgment, and reliability. On balance, I conclude that 
Applicant’s favorable evidence is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
