                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03815 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant continued to consume alcoholic beverages after an alcohol 
dependence diagnosis. He also has failed to timely file income tax returns for many 
years. Moreover, he made a false statement to a government investigator. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 13, 2004, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
May 21, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as modified and 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and it recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On July 1, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 26, 2009. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled on September 14, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 2.a through 
2.e, and 3.a. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He failed to address the allegation under 
SOR ¶ 3.b, and I considered it denied. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old project manager working for a defense contractor. He 
graduated from college in 1991, and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in English 
Literature. He completed his master’s degree (business management and computer 
science) in 1995. He has never been married and has no children.  
 
In 1992, Applicant received an active duty officer commission in the U.S. Air 
Force. He achieved the rank of captain, and was honorably discharged in December 
2002. While in the service, Applicant held a top secret security clearance. His security 
clearance was continued when he was hired by a government contractor in September 
2004. Applicant has held access to classified information for approximately 17 years. 
There is no evidence that Applicant has ever failed to follow security procedures or that 
he has compromised classified information. 
 
During 1997, Applicant consumed alcoholic beverages to excess. He attributed 
his excessive consumption of alcohol to several events: the end of a four-year 
relationship, a failing business that caused him to file for bankruptcy protection, and a 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines in all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
permanent change of duty station. Because of his failed business, Applicant filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in October 1996. The bankruptcy was discharged in 
about December 1996.2 
 
In 1997, Applicant realized he had a problem controlling his alcohol consumption 
and started to accept himself as an alcoholic. He was consuming a six pack of beer and 
a bottle of wine frequently. Because of his concerns, Applicant voluntarily entered into a 
28-day impatient alcohol treatment program sponsored by the Air Force. He was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent and suffering from depression.  
 
Applicant successfully completed his alcohol impatient treatment program. He 
continued his aftercare treatment and participated in group therapy once a week for one 
year. During that same year, he attended approximately 100 Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. Applicant testified he completed the AA 12-step process and continued 
attending AA regularly until 2001. He was abstinent from 1998 to 2005. 
 
Applicant has been living with his girlfriend since 2003. However, he anticipates 
he will have to move out soon. Applicant has been treated for depression since around 
1996. During 2004, Applicant was treated for depression at a Veterans Administration 
medical center and placed on medication. He is currently not taking antidepressants. 
Applicant and his doctor mutually agreed to stop the medications on a trial basis. 
Applicant believes he is doing well without the medications. Applicant informed his 
doctors that he started to consume alcoholic beverages again around 2005. The doctors 
advised Applicant against consuming alcohol.  
 
Applicant’s 2004 medical records indicate he was considered an alcoholic in 
remission. He was diagnosed with depression and alcoholism (alcohol dependent). His 
prognosis was deferred. Applicant testified that he sought treatment in 2004 because of 
depression problems and only received depression-related treatment. He denied 
receiving any alcohol-related treatment. However, from about May 2005 to about 
October 2006, Applicant received psychiatric treatment, in part, for his use of alcohol. 
 
Applicant claimed that he currently consumes one drink a day or approximately 
two drinks three times a week. He only drinks socially. He considers himself to be a 
recovering alcoholic and does not drink to the point of intoxication. Applicant is currently 
not attending AA meetings because he moved from one state to another and lost the 
habit of attending AA meetings. Applicant also believes he has heard AA’s message 
sufficiently and does not need to continue attending AA meetings. He believes he has a 
good handle on his personal situation. Applicant did not provide a current alcohol 
diagnosis or prognosis. 
 
 
2  Since his 1996 bankruptcy, Applicant has repaired his financial situation. He is current on all of 
his debts, has a high credit score, and has established a record of financial responsibility. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant noted that he has never had any legal problems or alcohol-related 
misconduct on or off work. Applicant averred he always tries to do the right thing as 
demonstrated by his volunteering for alcohol treatment in 1997, and seeking depression 
treatment in 2004. He promised to resolve his tax problems with the assistance of his 
accountant, and to drink in moderation. 
 
In August 2006, Applicant underwent a security clearance interview during which 
he denied consuming alcoholic beverages since his 1997 alcohol-related treatment. 
During a second interview in June 2007, Applicant admitted he lied to the investigator 
during his August 2006 interview (GE 6). He deliberately failed to disclose that he had 
started consuming alcoholic beverages in 2005.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant expressed remorse for lying to the investigator. He 
understands the seriousness of the security clearance process and knows he should 
have been honest and truthful with the investigator. He explained he was facing a 
stressful situation and had a momentary lapse of judgment. He averred he has been 
honest and forthcoming to his doctors about his alcohol consumption (Tr. 33-34). 
Applicant considers himself to be trustworthy, honest, and reliable. He believes he has 
matured and is now a different person. He is enjoying a good life and he believes he 
has no reason to drink excessively. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his state and federal income tax returns for tax years 
2004, 2005, and 2006. In 2007, he hired an accountant to assist him to resolve and stay 
on track with his taxes. He filed his state and federal income tax returns for tax years 
2004, 2005, and 2006 in 2008. As of his hearing date, Applicant had not filed his state 
and federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 and 2008. He attributed his failure to 
timely file his taxes to his procrastination and disorganization. He also believed it was 
okay for him not to timely file his tax returns because he knew he did not owe any taxes. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
5 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
6 
 
 
 
The government established its case under Guideline G by showing that on or 
about 1997, Applicant consumed alcohol to excess. Both in 1997 and 2004, Applicant 
was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and depression. He was abstinent from 1998 
to 2005. Applicant relapsed in 2005, and has continued to drink alcoholic beverages to 
present. Guideline G disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(d): “diagnosis by a duly qualified 
medical processional of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” AG ¶ 22(e): “evaluation 
of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a 
staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” and AG ¶ 22(f): “relapse after 
diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation 
program,” apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has ever been involved in any alcohol-related 
misconduct. He has continued consuming alcohol after his diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence in 1997 and 2004, and against his doctors’ advice. He intends to continue 
consuming alcohol in the future.  
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s initial diagnosis of alcohol 
 
7 
 
 
dependence was in 1997. However, Applicant’s alcohol dependence diagnosis was 
affirmed in 2004. Applicant’s alcohol consumption appears to be tied to his depression. 
He consumed alcohol to excess around 1997 because of emotional and personal 
problems. At his hearing, Applicant indicated he is going through emotional and 
personal problems with his current girlfriend. Without a current diagnosis and prognosis 
concerning his alcohol dependence and depression, Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
not sufficient to show it is unlikely his questionable behavior will recur. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant’s behavior raises questions about his reliability and judgment. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 1996, because of financial 
problems related to a failed business and the end of a four-year relationship. He also 
failed to timely file his state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2004, 2005, 
and 2006. He filed his state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2004, 2005, 
and 2006 in 2008. As of his hearing date, Applicant had not filed his state and federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2007 and 2008. He attributed his failure to timely file his 
taxes to his procrastination and disorganization. He also believed it was okay for him 
not to timely file his tax return because he knew he did not owe any taxes. AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and AG ¶ 19(g): “failure to file annual federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required,” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Concerning the 1996 bankruptcy, Applicant established circumstances beyond 
his control contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his failed business and the 
end of his four-year relationship. Applicant is current on his debts, has high credit 
scores, and is financially stable. Since 1996, he has established a track record of 
financial responsibility. I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) apply, but do not fully mitigate the 
financial considerations concerns.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s failure to timely file annual 
federal and state income tax returns as required by law (AG ¶ 19(g)). As of his hearing 
day, Applicant had not filed his 2007 and 2008 state and federal taxes because of his 
procrastination and disorganization. His behavior is recent and frequent, and casts 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, judgment, and ability to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
In August 2006, Applicant willfully lied to a government investigator to cover his 
alcohol relapse. He also failed to timely file his state and federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2004, 2005, and 2006. He filed his state and federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2004, 2005, and 2006 in 2008. As of his hearing date, Applicant had not filed his 
state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 and 2008.  
 
His falsification is material and triggers the applicability of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶ 16(b): “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative,” and AG ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment 
of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
 
9 
 
 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” His failure to timely file his 
state and federal income tax returns also triggers the applicability of AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find that none apply to the 
facts of this case. Applicant’s behavior is recent. His falsification constitutes a felony 
offense under 18 USC Section 1001, and it casts doubt on his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and well-
educated man. He honorably served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force for 
approximately 10 years, and has held access to classified information for approximately 
17 years. He has successfully worked for government contractors since 2004. There is 
no evidence he has ever compromised classified information or committed any security 
violations. Nor is there evidence that he has been involved in any alcohol-related 
misconduct on or off work. These factors show responsibility, good judgment, and 
mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, Applicant was diagnosed with depression and alcohol 
dependence in 1997 and 2004. He successfully underwent alcohol rehabilitation in 
1997, and participated in aftercare treatment. He was abstinent from around 1998 to 
2005. His excessive alcohol consumption was related to personal and emotional 
problems. In 2004-2005, Applicant required treatment for depression and shortly 
thereafter, he started consuming alcoholic beverages again. Notwithstanding his 
diagnosis as alcohol dependent and his physicians’ recommendations against his 
consumption of alcohol, Applicant has continued to consume alcoholic beverages to the 
day of his hearing. Applicant failed to present a current diagnosis and prognosis 
concerning his alcohol dependence. 
 
 Applicant also failed to timely file annual federal and state income tax returns as 
required by law because of his procrastination and disorganization. Moreover, in August 
2006, Applicant willfully lied to a government investigator to cover his 2005 alcohol 
relapse. 
 
 
11 
 
 
On balance, I conclude that Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption, financial 
considerations, and personal conduct. Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me 
of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a &1.b:    For Applicant 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.b - 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a - 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
