                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00156 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 6, 2007, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 21, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 2, 2009. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On October 8, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on October 9, 2009. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
October 15, 2009.  
 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on November 6, 2009 within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on November 14, 2009. He submitted documents 
including two employee evaluations, many customer comment forms, and four character 
letters. The Department Counsel objected to these documents. I overruled the objection 
and admitted the documents under the general category labeled “Response.”  
 
I received the case assignment on November 16, 2009. Based upon a review of 
the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR, except Paragraph 
1.b which he partially admitted and partially denied. I considered it denied for the 
purposes of this decision. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old, married and divorced twice. He has one child. He 
works for a defense contractor and has since January 2007. (Items 5, 6, Response) 
 
Applicant worked for a non-appropriated fund at an air base from 1998 to March 
2002.  He was terminated from that position after making statements in the workplace 
regarded by his supervisors as threatening comments.  He failed to attend some 
mandatory training, and when questioned about this lack of attendance, he became 
“seriously agitated and said (he) was going to go on a killing spree.”  He was escorted 
off the air base, and his employment later terminated in March 2002. (Items 5, 7) 
 
In September 2005, Applicant worked for a charitable institution which operates 
stores selling used clothing and other merchandise to customers.  He was a store 
manager.  His employer terminated him then for the use of profane, abusive or 
threatening language he directed toward fellow employees, customers, guests or 
supervisors.  Applicant was warned about his type of behavior in a letter from his 
supervisor dated August 31, 2005. (Items 5, 7, 9, 10) 
 
Applicant was terminated by another employer, a facility service provider, in April 
2006 for testing positive for marijuana in his initial urine test conducted by his employer.  
Applicant worked for that company four days before being terminated.  He did not list 
this employer in his SF-86 in response to Question 11 (Employment Activities). 
Applicant also failed to list his termination by the same employer in response to 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Question 22 (Employment Record). Applicant did list his terminations by the two other 
employers who fired him in 2002 and 2005. (Items 5, 7, 8) 
 
Applicant admitted in two statements he smoked marijuana from 1977 when he 
was in high school until April 2006.  He considered it self-medication and a relaxant. 
Applicant also listed family deaths, the shooting of a friend, and a variety of personal 
medical problems as the explanation for his behavior.  He claims he will not use illegal 
drugs in the future. (Items 6, 7) 
 
Applicant admitted in his October 2008 statement to a government investigator 
he was terminated by a collegiate baseball umpire association for whom he worked. His 
termination occurred in June 2006 after he failed to return phone calls from your 
employer seeking an umpire for a game. Applicant admitted he did not return the 
telephone calls because he had enough work to do. Then he stated he was rehired by 
the umpire association in October 2008.  However, Applicant submitted in November 
2009 as part of his Response a statement from the collegiate umpire association 
associate booking agent, dated November 4, 2009, stating Applicant took a leave of 
absence for a year and then another year from the umpire association. This booking 
agent states Applicant was never terminated by the association. In his November 6, 
2009, Response Applicant admits he was suspended from the association for failure to 
return the phone calls from his employer.  He also claims he was too busy to work in 
2007 and 2008, but he claims he was reinstated in 2009. I find Applicant’s October 2008 
statement to be more credible, and that he was terminated by the umpire association. 
(Items 5, 7, Response) 
 
Applicant submitted many pages of email customer surveys and messages 
praising him for his work on a computer help desk for his current employer.  His two 
employee evaluations dated January 2008 and January 2009, showing he meets 
expectations as an overall assessment. His character statements praise his umpiring 
skills and that he is detail oriented in his work. (Response)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
 
 
 
 
 
4
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group 
 
 Applicant intentionally, deliberately, and repeatedly falsified information about his 
prior employment and termination by that employer on his 2007 personnel security 
questionnaires. The reasons for his terminations by three employers are credible 
adverse information showing a pattern of inappropriate workplace behavior and rule 
violations. This conduct creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because it affects Applicant’s ability to retain and obtain other employment in the future. 
I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, an such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant did not correct his deliberate falsifications concerning his termination by 
one employer and the marijuana use until confronted by the government investigator. 
The omitted information casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment because it is material and substantive in security clearance process. Applicant 
has not acknowledged any wrongdoing nor obtained any counseling or rehabilitation for 
 
 
 
 
 
7
his past drug use and falsification. The information about his termination is 
substantiated. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
completed the SF-86.  Mendacity is not a virtue.  Applicant deliberately failed to make 
the full disclosure required by the SF-86. He voluntarily omitted the termination.  There 
is no rehabilitation.  Applicant was motivated by his desire to retain his job.  Anytime any 
information of this nature is withheld by an applicant there is potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation or duress. It is likely that he will continue this type of falsification to 
enhance his credentials. In addition, the pattern of inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace which led to his terminations cannot be condoned. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
