 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-08417 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Nicole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On February 12, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 6, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On August 21, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
On September 21, 2009, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for October 
14, 2009. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. 
He offered one exhibit that was marked as AE A into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on October 21, 2009. The record remained open until 
October 29, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. He 
timely submitted six documents that I marked as AE B through G and admitted into the 
record without objection from Department Counsel.                                                        
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.q. He admitted the allegation contained in ¶ 1.r. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and married. They have two daughters, an 11-year-old 
and an 8-year-old. The older daughter was born with cerebral palsy and is 
developmentally disabled.1 In 2001, his wife was diagnosed with a chronic arthritic 
condition and was subsequently determined to be medically disabled in 2003. Applicant 
has completed some college courses and various courses in information technology 
(IT).  
 
 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1995. He was on active duty until he was 
honorably discharged in October 1999, as a third class petty officer (E-4). He held a 
security clearance throughout his Navy career. After leaving the Navy, he worked for a 
defense contractor for a year and then relocated to work with another employer in early 
2000.  
 
 In October 2003, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In January 2004, the 
bankruptcy court discharged about $77,000 of unsecured debt, which included 
household items, vehicles, credit cards, and medical bills related to his daughter’s and 
wife’s medical conditions that began accumulating in 2001. (GE 5.) 
 
 In June 2006, Applicant again relocated for his employment, but was 
subsequently laid off in December 2006. He was unemployed from January 2007 until 
March 2007, when he started his current position. Recently, he received a promotion to 
a team leader position. He supervises 30 IT technicians. 
 
In February 2008, Applicant completed an e-QIP. On December 23, 2008, he 
submitted answers to the government’s Interrogatories pertaining to his delinquent 
debts. He attached to his response a copy of a December 2008 credit bureau report 
(CBR) and copies of eleven letters that he mailed to the credit bureau reporting agency 
                                            
1 Applicant’s daughter’s premature birth in 1998 resulted in the accumulation of nearly $1M of 
medical bills. His insurance, through the Navy, covered all of those expenses. (Tr. 25.) 
 
 
 
 
3
disputing debts listed in the CBR, most of which are medical debts that he believes 
were paid by insurance companies. (Tr. 57.)  
 
 The June 2009 SOR alleged that since his 2004 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
accumulated $26,077 of delinquent debts owed to 17 creditors. (GE 3, 4)  Applicant 
stated that he disputed many of the debts again in September 2009, having not 
received replies to his previous December 2008 dispute letters. The status of each of 
the 17 debts is as follows: 
   
I. Debts Disputed and Removed from Subsequent Credit Bureau Reports 
 
(1) Applicant twice disputed the debt alleged in ¶ 1. a for $592. It is owed to a 
cellular phone company. He denies owing the debt. It is listed on the February 
2008 CBR, but not on the January 2009 or September 2009 CBRs. (GE 3, 4; 
AE A; Tr. 31.)  
 
(2) In December 2008, Applicant disputed the medical debt alleged in ¶ 1.d for 
$617. He stated that he paid the debt. It is listed on the February 2008 CBR, 
but not on the January 2009 or September 2009 CBRs. (GE 3, 4; AE A; Tr. 
35.) 
 
(3) In December 2008, Applicant disputed the medical debt alleged ¶ 1.n for 
$416. It appears on the January 2009 CBR, but not on the September 2009 
CBR. (GE 3, 4: AE A.) 
 
(4)  In December 2008, Applicant disputed the medical debt alleged ¶ 1.o for 
$148. It appears on the January 2009 CBR, but not on the September 2009 
CBR. (GE 3, 4: AE A.) 
 
(5) In December 2008, Applicant disputed the medical debt alleged ¶ 1.p for $53. 
It appears on the January 2009 CBR, but not on the September 2009 CBR. 
(GE 3, 4: AE A.) 
 
II. Debts Disputed and Deleted from Credit Bureau Reporting Agency 
 
(6-13) Eight medical debts have been deleted from Applicant’s credit report 
pursuant to his dispute: ¶ 1.b for $73; ¶ 1.c for $159; ¶ 1.e for $306; ¶ 1.f for 
$46; ¶ 1.g for $33; ¶ 1.l for $86; ¶ 1.m for $257; and ¶ 1.q for $73. (AE F.) 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.l are duplicates. (Tr. 37.) 
 
III. Debt Included in 2004 Bankruptcy 
 
(14) The $101 cellular debt alleged in ¶ 1.j was included in the 2004 bankruptcy. 
(AE F; GE 2: 12/10/08 CBR.)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
IV. Debts Disputed and Verified 
 
(15) After disputing the medical debt alleged in ¶ 1.h for $4,784, the credit 
reporting agency verified it as Applicant’s debt in October 2009. (AE F, G.) In his 
December 2008 letter, he indicated that the debt could be for a surgery he had 
two years earlier, but he was not certain because he thought his insurance would 
have paid it. (GE 2 at 113.) 
 
(16) After disputing the $70 medical debt alleged in ¶ 1.i, the credit reporting 
agency verified it as Applicant’s debt. (AE F.)  
 
V. Debt in Dispute 
 
(17) Applicant continues to dispute the debt listed in ¶ 1.k for $18,263, although 
the credit reporting agency verified it.2 (AE F.) After working for his previous 
employer for six years, he lost his job in December 2006. He was offered a 
severance package that included six months of severance pay, essentially one 
month’s pay for each year he worked. (Tr. 29.) He received that pay, but was 
informed by the company in October 2007 that he should have only been paid for 
ten weeks. (GE 2 at 120.) His employer claims he was paid the additional money 
in error. Applicant thought the matter was resolved until he received a CBR from 
DOHA in October 2008 and learned the employer submitted the claim to a 
collection agency. (Tr. 56.) Applicant has not taken legal action because he 
cannot afford legal fees. (Tr. 71.) This appears to be a legitimate dispute 
between Applicant and his former employer. (AE B, D, E; Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 In summary, $18,263 of the $26,077 delinquent debt alleged in the SOR relates 
to Applicant’s dispute with his former employer about severance pay that he received. 
Applicant has successfully disputed 13 debts, totaling $2,960, resulting in their deletion 
or removal from his credit file. Twelve of those debts were medical debts. One of the 
debts ($101) was included in his 2004 bankruptcy discharge. Two medical debts, 
totaling $4,784, were verified in October 2009 as his debts and need to be resolved or 
paid by him. (AE G.)  
 
 Applicant submitted his budget. His net monthly income is $3,905. His expenses 
are $1,650 and his payments on financial obligations are $1,857, leaving him a 
remainder of $398 at the end of the month. He works overtime many weeks, which adds 
to his income. (AE C.) In a letter he included in his December 2008 response to the 
Interrogatories, he explained his financial situation as follows: 
 
I feel that I am in good financial status. I filed bankruptcy 5 years ago due 
to an overwhelming amount of medical debt incurred due to my daughter’s 
disability and my wife’s medical condition and deteriorating health. I have 
                                            
2The exact amount of this debt is unclear. In the government’s interrogatories the debt is listed for 
$16,690. In a letter from the collection agency, the amount is listed as $13,775. (AE E.)  
 
 
 
 
5
not been late or missed a payment on my mortgage, credit card, or car 
payment since. (GE 2 at 121.) 
 
Although the February 2008, December 2008, January 2009, and September 2009 
CBRs disclose some of the alleged delinquent debts, the CBRs also list numerous 
accounts that are being “paid as agreed. “ (GE 2, 3, 4; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified. He has known Applicant since March 2009. He 
said that Applicant “has shown an incredible aptitude for strategic vision as well as 
tactical execution. He’s performing in the top 10 percent of the company with regard to 
his work range.” (Tr. 67.) He is very supportive of Applicant’s efforts to secure a security 
clearance. He is aware of Applicant’s financial problems and does not think they would 
cause a potential security risk. (Tr. 69.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
 
 
 
 
6
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial problems that began in 
2001 and resulted in the discharge of delinquent debt through a bankruptcy in 2004. He 
subsequently accumulated additional debts that he did not begin to address until 2008. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties, three of which may be applicable to this case: 
  
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant started 
accumulating a large amount of debt attributable to his wife and daughter’s medical 
condition in 2001 that he resolved through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2004. 
Since then, he incurred some additional medical bills and became engaged in a 
monetary dispute with his previous employer about a severance package. Those 
circumstances have been outside of his control. While he chose to resolve his earlier 
 
 
 
 
7
debts by means of a bankruptcy, he has disputed all of the SOR alleged debts on the 
basis that he does not believe he is responsible for them because the medical debts 
should have been paid by insurance companies, and he believes he has a legitimate 
dispute with his past employer about his severance pay. I find this potentially mitigating 
condition has some application.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant did not present evidence that he 
obtained formal credit counseling; however, he submitted copies of letters that he sent 
to creditors in December 2008 requesting verification of the alleged debts in order to 
resolve them. He submitted his budget, which indicates that his current financial 
obligations are under control. This mitigating condition has some application. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is fully applicable in this case. It provides mitigation when “an 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provided evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant produced 
evidence that he disputed 11 debts in December 2008 because he believes the medical 
debts were paid by insurance companies. He testified that he again disputed the debts 
in September 2009. As a result of his dispute letters, 13 debts were removed or deleted 
from his credit record. He continues to dispute the largest alleged debt based on his 
understanding of his severance package and may seek legal assistance. In October 
2009, he learned that two medical debts have been verified as being his debts. He has 
essentially attempted to resolve all of the 17 SOR debts through the dispute process 
with the credit reporting agency.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
8
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 33-year-old man, who 
honorably served his country for four years in the military. After leaving the service, his 
wife and daughter experienced severe medical conditions that created significant debt, 
which was later discharged through a bankruptcy. Since that 2004 discharge, credit 
bureau reports have indicated that he has accumulated more delinquent debts, but also 
report that he is current on many financial obligations. Applicant has repeatedly denied 
owning the alleged debts and challenged all of them. At this time, the largest debt of 
$18,263 appears to relate to a legitimate dispute that he has with his previous employer 
and does not create a security concern. Two medical debts that total $4,784 have 
recently been confirmed to be his debts and need to be resolved. All other debts, 
totaling $2,960, are resolved.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. There is no other evidence 
in his background to indicate that a financial dispute with his former employer or two 
medical bills that total less than $5,000 may create a security risk. For all these reasons, 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
