                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09986 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
G, Alcohol Consumption, J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
G, J, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 25, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 22, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on the same day, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on November 10, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(GE) 1 through 6. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified 
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B and they were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and has been employed with a federal contractor since 
October 2008. He has previous employment with a different federal contractor. He is not 
married and has no children. He earned bachelors and associates degrees. His present 
job is as an information systems specialist.1  
 
 In February 2004, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DUI). He 
was with high school friends and all of them consumed alcohol. He was drinking 
Southern Comfort. He dropped his friends off at their homes and proceeded to go to his 
home when he was stopped by police. He stated he had consumed about three to four 
alcoholic drinks over a three-hour period. A breathalyzer was administered and 
Applicant’s results were .12%. Applicant admitted that he knew he was driving under the 
influence of alcohol and should not be driving, but did not believe he was drunk. He was 
convicted of DUI and sentenced to 30 days in jail, which was suspended. In addition, his 
driver’s license was restricted for one year and he was ordered to attend the state’s 
alcohol and safety awareness program (ASAP). He completed the program and stated 
he learned about the effects of alcohol on the body.2  
 
 Applicant stated that he considers himself a social drinker. He believed he could 
handle driving after he had been drinking and did not believe he was over the legal limit 
when he drove. He admitted he felt the effects of the alcohol he had consumed, but felt 
he had control over his motor functions. Once he was stopped by police, he knew he 
was over the limit.3  
 
 In July 2007, Applicant was visiting friends in another city. He consumed one 
drink at the hotel. He and his friends then went to a lounge and he consumed “a couple 
of drinks.” His friend felt light-headed so he took her back to the hotel in a horse drawn 
carriage. When they arrived, he realized he left his automatic teller bank card (ATM) at 
the lounge and did not have money to pay the carriage driver. He did not think the driver 
would take him back to the lounge without first receiving payment, so he drove his 
friend’s car back to the lounge. He was stopped by the police because he was driving 
on a street that was designated for a monorail. He received five tickets. Applicant stated 
he did not feel drunk and he did not notice the effects of alcohol. He stated he panicked 
1 Tr. 80-82. 
 
2 Tr. 22-28. 
 
3 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
when he realized he did not have his ATM card. He disputes that a roadside sobriety 
test was administered. He was taken to the police station where he was given a 
breathalyzer. It was determined he was over the legal limit, but he does not know what 
the reading was. He was arrested and charged with DUI. He remained in the city for five 
days to resolve the charges. He pled guilty and his license was suspended for one year 
in the state and he received a fine. He stated he contacted his manager at work and told 
him he needed to take time off from work. He told him about his arrest. He stated his 
manager told him to keep it quiet and not report it to the company.4  
  
 A couple of days before his birthday in December 2007, Applicant went to a bar 
by himself. He consumed two to three drinks and then the bartender made him a special 
drink for his birthday. He stated he felt he had his alcohol consumption under control. 
He left the bar to get something to eat and fell asleep while driving and hit a parked car. 
His airbag deployed. He stated he was going the speed limit. He did not have his cell 
phone with him, so he moved his car out of the street and walked home. Shortly 
thereafter, the police arrived at his house and asked him about the accident. He 
admitted he hit the car. He was taken to the police station and given a breathalyzer 
which recorded .16%. Applicant did not consider himself drunk when he left the bar. 
Applicant was found guilty of DUI, second offense and hit-and-run not reported. He was 
sentenced to one year in jail and nine months were suspended. He served 60 days and 
the remaining 30 days was suspended for good conduct. He took leave without pay 
during his sentence. Applicant’s license was suspended for three years. The 
suspension expires in April 2011. He was ordered to attend ASAP. He stated he learned 
a great deal from ASAP. He learned the scientific information about how alcohol affects 
the body. He was ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for 20 sessions. He 
stated he admitted at the meetings he was an alcoholic, but does not believe he is one. 
He never engaged in a 12-step program. He stated he does not believe he is alcohol-
dependent. He believes he can control his alcohol consumption. He completed two 
ASAP courses, one for ten weeks and one for six weeks. Applicant believes he is on 
unsupervised probation until 2011. Applicant has only attended court-mandated 
counseling. When Applicant returned to work, his employer could not permit him to work 
in the same position and could not find a position for him within the company due to the 
adverse conduct, so Applicant resigned. He was unemployed for a period of about four 
months before he found another job.5  
 
 Applicant stated he has “cut back significantly”6 on his drinking and he believes 
he can control his alcohol consumption. He stated that everything bad that has 
happened to him involved alcohol consumption. He stated his last drinks were at a 
wedding in August 2009, where he consumed three drinks of whiskey at an open bar. 
4 Tr. 29-38, 54. 
 
5 Tr. 19, 38-48, 55-60, 70-72. 
 
6 Tr. 20. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
He stated he rarely goes to bars, but will have a drink at a restaurant. He may drink 
three times a month and have about one to three drinks, if it is a special occasion.7  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on March 30, 2008. 
In response to question 23d, which asked if he had committed any alcohol-related 
offenses, Applicant responded “Yes,” and divulged the 2004 offense and the July 2007 
offense. He did not divulge the pending charges for the December 2007 DUI and hit-
and-run offenses. He answered “No” to question 23c which asked if he had any charges 
currently pending. Applicant was aware at the time he had an upcoming court date on 
April 30, 2008, to resolve his December 2007 charges. He stated he did not know why 
he did not divulge his most recent offenses that were pending. He stated he did divulge 
it to the investigator when he spoke to him on April 28, 2008, days before he was to 
appear in court. I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately withheld requested 
information from his SCA that he was required to divulge.8 
 
 Applicant stated that his parents were concerned about his alcohol consumption 
and wished he would not drink. They do not approve of his consumption because of the 
problems it has caused him.9  
 
 Applicant is very involved with his church and is a mentor to young adults. He 
has used his experiences to help his siblings not make the same mistakes he has 
made.10  
 
Applicant provided certificates of completion for educational programs he 
completed. He also provided two character letters. One letter from his pastor, who 
believes Applicant is an intelligent, capable, dedicated, and trustworthy young man who 
has learned from his mistakes. A second letter is from a friend who describes him as a 
hard worker and amazing human being whose opinion is valued.11  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
7 Tr. 48-52. 
 
8 Tr. 63-69, 84-86. 
 
9 Tr. 69-71. 
 
10 Tr. 20-21. 
 
11 Tr. 20-21; AE A and B. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
6 
 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant has three alcohol-related arrests and convictions. One occurred in 
2004 and two occurred in 2007. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt o the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has three DUI convictions. His last alcohol-related arrest involved a 
single vehicle hit-and-run accident. Each time he drove his vehicle after consuming 
alcohol, he believed he was not intoxicated. His breathalyzer readings were 
considerably higher than the legal limit, especially his most recent DUI reading. He 
attended ASAP after his first arrest, but apparently it had little impact on his decision-
making process, and he did not heed its warnings. Applicant completed the required 
court-mandated alcohol safety programs and attended AA as ordered. Although he 
acknowledges that everything bad that has happened in his life has involved alcohol, he 
continues to believe that he can be a responsible drinker. That may be the case, but his 
track record reflects the opposite. Applicant makes poor decisions when he consumes 
alcohol, and he continues to consume alcohol. No evidence was presented to confirm 
any treatment program, voluntary attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous, or a similar 
organization, or any prognosis from a medical professional. Although it has been 
approximately two years since Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest, I am not convinced 
 
7 
 
 
that he grasps the true impact alcohol has on his life. He appears to believe that he was 
merely unlucky and can control his behavior. There is no evidence that Applicant is 
alcohol-dependent; however, there is overwhelming evidence that Applicant’s judgment 
is impaired when consuming alcohol. After his first alcohol-related incident, he was on 
notice that he could not gauge his level of intoxication. He did not learn and proceeded 
to have two more incidents. Applicant is an educated man who is making bad choices. 
Based on his past, I am not convinced at this juncture, that Applicant has fully embraced 
the corrective measures necessary to avoid future alcohol-related problems, and that 
future problems are unlikely to recur. I find none of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 From 2004 to 2007, Applicant had three DUI convictions and a conviction for a 
single vehicle hit-and-run. He has completed his jail sentences and his driver’s license 
remains suspended. Applicant is on probation until 2011. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has three DUI convictions for incidents that occurred in 2004 and 2007. 
His latest incident involved a single vehicle accident when he fell asleep at the wheel 
while driving home from a bar. He remains on probation until 2011. I find (a) does not 
apply because Applicant is still on probation and no evidence was offered to show his 
conduct is unlikely to recur. His repeated criminal conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide sufficient substantive evidence that he has changed 
his alcohol consumption and is successfully rehabilitated. He continues to consume 
alcohol and believes he can be responsible. Applicant is remorseful for his actions 
because of the negative impact it has had on his life. He testified that he has modified 
his consumption of alcohol. Based on the character letters and certificates of completion 
he provided, it appears he has constructive community involvement. However, due to 
Applicant’s repeated conduct, not enough time has passed to convince me that he is 
rehabilitated and there is insufficient evidence to conclude such. I find AG ¶ 23(a) and 
23(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG ¶ 16 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 When completing his SCA Applicant failed to divulge he had pending DUI and 
hit-and-run charges. He was arrested in December 2007 and his court date was April 
30, 2008. He knew when he completed his SCA on March 31, 2008, that he had 
pending charges. He did not provide any credible explanation for why he failed to 
divulge this information. I find that the both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
9 
 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I 
have considered all of them under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
  There is no evidence Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
omission. He did not divulge the pertinent information until he was interviewed by an 
investigator, two days before his court date. I find mitigating condition (a) does not 
apply. Applicant had two prior DUIs and failed to disclose his third DUI and hit-and-run 
charges that were pending. His concealment of this information is not considered minor 
and it casts doubts on his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I do not find there 
were any unique circumstances. I find mitigating condition (c) does not apply. There is 
no evidence to support the application of mitigating condition (d) in connection with his 
false answers on his SCA. Applicant did not provide a credible explanation for his 
concealment of important information he failed to provide on his SCA. Applicant’s 
family, friends and employer are aware of his criminal and alcohol history, which 
reduces his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. However, there is no 
evidence that they are aware of his falsification on his SCA, so mitigating condition (e) 
only partially applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
10 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an educated man. He 
provided evidence that he is involved in his community. He has three DUI convictions 
and a hit-and-run conviction, the last incident occurring in December 2007. Each time 
Applicant drove his car after drinking alcohol, he did not believe he was intoxicated. His 
breathalyzer results showed he was well over the legal limit. He continues to consume 
alcohol and believes he can do so responsibly. Applicant intentionally and deliberately 
failed to divulge his most recent DUI and hit-and-run charge that was pending at the 
time he completed his SCA. He remains on probation until 2011. Based on his repeated 
conduct, I am not convinced that he has made permanent behavioral changes and it is 
too early to conclude otherwise. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the Guidelines for Alcohol Consumption, Criminal Conduct, and Personal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph  2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph  3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
