                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09721 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
B, Foreign Influence, and C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
On May 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 16, 2009. The government 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
September 25, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 1, 2009. I convened 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
the hearing as scheduled on November 5, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 4. Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. The 
government also offered for administrative notice Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through X. I 
granted the request and the documents were considered. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and he offered Exhibits (AE) A through D. They were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 12, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He was born in Syria and came to the U.S. in 1979 to 
attend college. He has lived in the U.S. since that time. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1991. He earned a bachelors degree in 1985 and a master’s degree in 1989. 
Since November 1989, he has been employed as an engineer for different American 
companies. In June 2007, he accepted a position with his current employer, a 
government contractor.1  
 
 Applicant has been married three times. He married his first wife in 1985. She 
was a U.S. citizen by birth. They divorced in 1988. He met his second wife when he was 
in Syria. She was a Syrian citizen and resident. She never moved to the U.S. They 
married in 1997, and the marriage was annulled in 1998. He met his third wife when he 
was in Syria. They were engaged for a year and married in the U.S. in 2006. She is a 
citizen of Syria and a resident of the U.S. They have one child born in the U.S. and 
another is due to be born in December 2009.2 
 
 In 2005, Applicant applied for and was issued a Syrian passport, even though he 
was a naturalized U.S. citizen. The passport will not expire until April 19, 2011. He was 
advised by Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) on August 21, 2008, 
that if he voluntarily destroyed his Syrian passport in the presence of his Facilities 
Security Officer (FSO) that DISCO may grant his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance. He was told the procedure to follow if he intended to destroy the passport.3 
On the notification letter from DISCO, a written notation was made explaining that 
Applicant wanted an opportunity to explain to DOHA why he would like to keep his 
passport.4 On May 29, 2009, he received the SOR, which again advised him that 
retaining his Syrian passport was a security concern. As of the date of his hearing, 
Applicant retained his Syrian passport. He stated he is willing to surrender his Syrian 
1 Tr. 23-26. 
 
2 Tr. 32-34, 40-45. 
 
3 Tr. 19; AE C. 
 
4 AE C. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
passport for destruction. He stated he had not yet provided the passport for destruction 
because he is waiting to be instructed to do so.5 In a document provided at his hearing 
Applicant stated “I am willing to surrender my Syrian passport to my employer’s security 
authority for [safe keeping] or destruction.” In his answer to the SOR he stated that “if 
requested, the Syrian passport can be submitted to your office or given to your 
designated security officer for destruction.”6 Despite repeated advice about the 
ramification of retention of his Syrian passport, Applicant continues to retain his Syrian 
passport. I did not find Applicant’s offer to submit his passport for destruction to be 
made sincerely or in good faith.  
 
 Applicant explained he obtained a Syrian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
so when he traveled to Syrian he would not be subjected to officials at the airport 
attempting to extort money from him because he has an American passport. He stated if 
he shows a Syrian passport he is less likely to be solicited for money. He stated he has 
never used his Syrian passport for entering or exiting any country. He always uses his 
American passport. However, if he felt the need to, while in Syria, he would show it. 
Applicant also explained that he was detained at the airport because he believed the 
officials were attempting to extort money from him. He said he did not show his Syrian 
passport because it did not feel right.7  
 
 Applicant stated he has no rights, privileges, or obligations to any foreign country 
and receives no benefits from a foreign country. He stated that in 2001, he paid the 
country of Syria $10,000 so he would be exempt from military service in Syria. In his 
answer to the SOR, he quoted a U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information 
document pertaining to Syria. It stated: “the fee for exemption from military service 
ranges from $5,000 to $15,000, depending upon the circumstances, for Syrian-
American and Palestinian-American men who live abroad.”8 
 
 Applicant does not own any property in the U.S. He has approximately $47,000 
to $50,000 in assets. He has approximately $100,000 in his 401(k). In 1985, he 
purchased an unfurnished apartment as investment property in Syria. At the time it cost 
about $10,000. He notes it is now worth between $15,000 and $20,000. He has 
considered selling the property, but would have difficulty transferring money from Syria 
to the U.S. He does not receive any income from the property or pay taxes on it. In his 
answer to the SOR, he stated “I am willing to sell the property if necessary.”9 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of Syria and the U.S. She resides in Syria. 
Applicant sponsored her for U.S. citizenship in 1999. She lived in the U.S. from 1999 to 
5 Tr. 20-21. 
 
6 Tr.35-40, 45-55; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 19, 45-48, 63-66. 
 
8 Tr. 20, 29, 70-74. 
 
9 Tr. 22, 27-32, 69; Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
2002. She returned to Syria and has lived there since then. She visited Applicant in the 
U.S. in 2006. Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Syria. He owns a men’s 
clothing store and is self-employed. Applicant talks to his parents weekly.10  
 
 Applicant has a brother who lives in the U.S. His brother became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 1999. His brother is a loan officer. He is divorced, and his children live 
with their mother in the same metropolitan area.11 
 
 Applicant has a sister who is a citizen of Syria and is a permanent resident of the 
U.S. She is a homemaker and her husband is a doctor. They live in Saudi Arabia where 
her husband is the director of a government urgent care hospital. He is from Syria and 
is a naturalized citizen of U.S. They have lived in Saudi Arabia for a year and a half. 
They have one child who was born in Syria.12  
 
 Applicant has another sister who is a dual citizen of Syria and the United 
Kingdom. She is a homemaker who lives in Syria. She is married to an eye doctor. They 
have two children, ages 18 and 24, who attend school in the Czech Republic. The 
children are dual citizens of Syria and the United Kingdom. Applicant speaks with his 
sister weekly.13 
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Syria. His father-in-law 
retired from the Damascus police department in 1993. Applicant did not know if his 
father-in-law receives a pension and does not know where he gets money to live. His 
mother-in-law is a homemaker. She has visited Applicant and his wife in the U.S. one 
time after their child was born in February 2008. His wife has almost daily contact by 
telephone with her parents. Applicant has contact with them two or three times a year.14  
 
 Applicant‘s wife has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Syria. One is a 
homemaker and her husband, also a citizen and resident of Syria manages a factory 
that makes laundry detergent. They have no children. Her other sister is single and lives 
with her parents.15  
 
 Applicant visited Syria seven times from April 1997 to September 2008. He 
estimated he visited once in 1998, once in 1999, once in 2004, three times in 2005, and 
once in 2006. Since 2006, Applicant’s wife has visited Syria without him two to three 
times for about 30 days each visit. In May 2009 Applicant and his wife visited Syria and 
10 Tr. 22, 76-81. 
 
11 Tr. 34, 81-83. 
 
12 Tr. 83-90. 
 
13 Tr. 90-92. 
 
14 Tr. 22, 92-94, 100. 
 
15 Tr. 96-98. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
saw both sets of parents and other family members, including his sister and brother-in-
law and his wife’s two sisters, who are Syrian citizens. Applicant’s wife and his son 
visited for about six weeks. Applicant stated that his son is considered a Syrian citizen 
by the Syrian government because his mother and father were born in Syria. Applicant 
and his son traveled on their U.S. passports. His wife used her Syrian passport.16  
 
 Applicant was asked at his hearing if he had considered renouncing his Syrian 
citizenship. He responded “I have not considered it, because I had no reason, and I 
know it’s not against the law in the United States to be a dual citizen. In his answer to 
government interrogatories that included the summary of his interview and which 
Applicant authenticated, he stated he did not know if he would renounce his Syrian 
citizenship, but would consider it. When asked again at his hearing if he had considered 
it, he stated, “if required, yes, I would renounce it.”17 
 
Syria18 
 
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime and is included on the U.S. State 
Department’s List of State Sponsors of Terrorism. There are several known terrorist 
groups in Syria. The government of Syria continues to provide political and material 
support to Hezbollah and Palestinian terrorist groups. Several terrorist groups maintain 
their offices and external leadership in Syria. In addition, the government of Syria 
permits Iran to transfer weapons and supplies through their country to assist terrorists in 
Lebanon. Syria is one of the main transit points for foreign fighters entering Iraq. A 
travel warning for Syria warns about terrorism due to the September 2006 attack on the 
U.S. embassy in Damascus. There have been other attacks on the U.S. Ambassador’s 
residence and the U.S. embassy in 1998 and 2000. 
 
 The U.S. instituted economic sanctions against Syria due to their active and 
passive support of terrorism in the Middle East. No commercial aircraft owned or 
operated by the Syrian government may take off or land in the U.S. There are human 
rights abuses in Syria that include systematic repression of citizens’ ability to change 
government, arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, torture and physical abuse of 
prisoners and detainees, arbitrary arrests and detention, restrictions on freedom of 
speech, press, assembly, and association, government corruption, and violence and 
discrimination against women. Torture is frequently used, including against foreign 
citizens. Security personnel have placed foreign visitors under surveillance, have 
monitored telephones, and have searched hotel rooms and possessions of foreign 
citizens.  
 
16 Tr. 55-63, 66-69. 
 
17 Tr. 74-75. 
 
18 HE I-X. 
 
6 
 
 
 Dual citizens and U.S. citizens of Syrian origin may be subject to compulsory 
military service in Syrian unless they receive a temporary or permanent exemption from 
such service prior to their entry into Syria.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern regarding foreign preference:  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport .  .  .   (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or 
business interests in another country. 
Applicant holds a valid Syrian passport. He paid a fee to exempt himself from 
serving in the Syrian military and he owns property in Syria. Due to the economic 
sanctions imposed on Syria by the U.S., he can not transfer money from Syria to the 
U.S. I find disqualifying condition (a) (1) and (5) applies. 
I have considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11. Specifically I have 
considered the following:  
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and  
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely on his birth in a foreign country. 
He was born in Syria and retained his Syrian citizenship after he became a U.S. citizen 
by applying for and retaining a Syrian passport. I find (a) does not apply. Applicant has 
not formally renounced his Syrian citizenship. He has expressed a willingness to do so, 
but only if requested. He has been advised about the security ramifications of retaining 
his passport and citizenship. I did not find that Applicant’s offer to relinquish or destroy 
his Syrian passport, or his offer to renounce his Syrian citizenship to be sincere and in 
good faith. Despite repeated advice on how to relinquish his Syrian passport he has not 
taken any action. I find (b) does not apply. Applicant continues to hold property in Syria 
and paid the Syrian government so he would be exempt from military service, an 
obligation of male Syrian citizens. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
 
9 
 
 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Syria and his son is 
considered a Syrian citizen because he was born to a Syrian. She lives with Applicant in 
the U.S. and is a permanent U.S. resident. Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the 
U.S. and Syria and resides in Syria. His father is a citizen and resident of Syria. His 
sister and her husband are citizens of Syria residing in Saudi Arabia and his father-in-
law is a citizen and resident of Syria. Applicant owns property in Syria valued at 
approximately $15,000 to $20,000. Applicant traveled multiple times to Syria from 1998 
to 2009. The latest trip was in May 2009. His wife travels to Syria and visits for 
approximately four to six weeks. Applicant and his wife maintain close contact with 
family members in Syria. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;   
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant and his wife travel regularly to Syria to visit their family. They are both 
in close contact with their parents and relatives in Syria. His wife is in almost daily 
contact with her family there. Applicant has not met his burden of establishing that it is 
unlikely he will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
 
10 
 
 
family living in Syria and the interests of the U.S. His contacts with family in Syria could 
potentially force him to choose between the two.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. No evidence was presented 
that Syria conducts intelligence operations against the U.S. However, there is evidence 
regarding Syria’s human rights record and active support and sponsorship of terrorist 
groups operating in Syria and other countries. This places the burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in Syria do not pose a security risk, and he is 
not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the U.S. and his family 
members. With its negative human rights record, its authoritarian government, and its 
willingness to assist terrorist organizations, it is conceivable that Applicant’s family 
members could be vulnerable to coercion. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 1999 and retains his dual citizenship with 
Syria. He has some family in the U.S., but most of his ties through his family and his 
wife’s are in Syria. They travel there to spend time with their family, usually four to six 
weeks at a time. His wife is a Syrian citizen, as is his father and other relatives who also 
reside in Syria. His father-in-law is a retired police officer, who likely receives some type 
of pension from the Syrian government. Considering Syria’s human rights record and 
well known association and support of terrorist groups I find there is a potential conflict 
of interest, and under the circumstances mitigating condition (b) does not apply.  
 
Security concerns are reduced where contact and correspondence with foreign 
citizens are casual and infrequent because the risk of foreign exploitation or pressure is 
less. Applicant and his wife regularly visit their families in Syria. They also maintain 
regular telephone contact with their families. These contacts are not casual and 
infrequent. I find mitigating condition (c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant owns real property in Syria that is valued between $15,000 and 
$20,000. Based on Applicant’s total assets it is unlikely that the value of this property 
could be used to effectively influence, manipulate, or coerce him. Because Applicant 
has not divested himself of the property, it remains a concern because it is another 
strong tie that Applicant maintains with Syria. I find mitigating condition (f) applies to 
Applicant’s property interests. However, I will consider this factor when evaluating the 
whole person.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 
1979 and been a U.S. citizen since 1991. He retains his dual citizenship with Syrian and 
maintains an active Syrian passport. Despite being advised of the ramifications to his 
security clearance application, he continues to retain his Syrian passport. I did not find 
his testimony sincere or in good faith that he was willing to destroy the passport and 
renounce his Syrian citizenship. Applicant’s wife is a Syrian citizen. Applicant and his 
wife maintain close contact with their relatives in Syria. His wife speaks to her family 
almost daily and Applicant speaks with his family weekly. They travel to Syria to visit 
them and sometimes stay for four to six weeks. After becoming a U.S. citizen Applicant 
paid the Syrian government $10,000 to exempt him from compulsory military service. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
