 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09192 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
M, Use of Information Technology Systems, Guideline K, Handling Protected 
Information, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Applicant completed and signed a security clearance application on June 27, 
2002. On August 1, 2007, he completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions. On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems, Guideline K, Handling 
Protected Information, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
 
2 
 
 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On July 27, 2009, Department Counsel, 
pursuant to ¶ E.3.1.13 of the Directive, amended the allegation at SOR ¶ 3.a. to read as 
follows: “That information set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2, above.” Applicant answered 
the amended allegation in writing on August 7, 2009. The case was assigned to me on 
August 12, 2009. I convened a hearing on October 19, 2009, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection. The Government 
provided the following provisions from the National Industrial Security Program 
Operating Manual (NISPOM) for administrative notice: Chapter 5, Section 4, paragraphs 
5-400, 5-401, 5-402, 5-403, and 5-404 and Chapter 5, Section 5, paragraphs 5-500, 5-
501, 5-502, and 5-509. (January 1995). The Government’s administrative notice 
documents were marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
 Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. He introduced 13 
exhibits, which were identified and marked as Ex. A through Ex. M. Applicant’s exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
October 27, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline M, 
Use of Information Technology Systems, five allegations of disqualifying conduct under 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, and three allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant admitted three of the Guideline 
M allegations and denied one; he admitted three of the Guideline K allegations and 
denied two; he admitted one Guideline E allegation and he denied one Guideline E 
allegation. In his answer to the amended Guideline E allegation, Applicant wrote: 
“Please refer to my Answer, dated May 6, 2009, which addresses the allegations in 
paragraphs 1 and 2.” I interpret Applicant’s answer as a denial of amended SOR 
allegation 3.a. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. (Answer to 
SOR; Answer to Amended SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, married, and the father of five young children. He and 
his wife are expecting a sixth child. Applicant grew up in a military family but has no 
military service himself. (Ex. 1; Tr. 25-27.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from college in 1997, with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 
English Writing and a Bachelor of Arts degree in Theology. After graduating from 
college, he got a job writing technical manuals. That job led to employment in the 
 
3 
 
 
defense industry, and he was first granted a security clearance in 1997 or 1998. He was 
read into a special access program in 2004. He has worked for his present employer for 
almost five years. His current job title is Network Systems Specialist. In 2006, 
Applicant’s security clearance and special access eligibility were revoked by another 
government agency. (Ex. 2; Ex. 4, at 5-8; Tr. 27-29, 83-84.) 
 
 Applicant did not have an academic background in computer and information 
technology. He acquired his knowledge of the Windows Operating System from on-the-
job training and from coaching from more experienced co-workers. In 1998, he worked 
at a help desk and assisted other employees with their computer problems. In 1998 and 
1999, he began to study on-line for certification as a systems engineer. His position title 
in March 1999 was Windows System Administrator. (Ex. 2 at 4; Tr. 55-58.) 
 
 In about 2000 or 2001, Applicant changed jobs and began working with the UNIX 
Operating System. His co-workers mentored him and provided him with on-the-job 
training. He also took on-line training courses to learn more about the UNIX system, 
and, in 2001 and 2002, he took information technology networking courses. From June 
2002 to March 2003, he was assigned on an information technology contract overseas 
by his defense contractor employer. His position title in February 2003 was UNIX 
System Administrator. (Ex. 2 at 3-4; Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 55-57, 60-61.) 
 
 From October 2003 to October 2004, Applicant was employed as a Systems 
Engineer. His job title from October 2004 to the present is Network Systems Specialist. 
(Ex. 2 at 3.) 
 
 In 1999, he received a security briefing for systems administrators. He recalled 
that as a systems administrator, he was required to have periodic security briefings. His 
last security briefing occurred in 2006 before he lost his security clearance and special 
access eligibility. (Tr. 58-60.) 
 
  The SOR alleges a number of incidents that raised security concerns under 
Guidelines M, K, and E. These events occurred between 1998 and 2006. Many of the 
SOR allegations are based on Applicant’s self-reporting at the time the events occurred 
or during a polygraph interview conducted by another government agency in September 
2005. Applicant acknowledged that he did not know all the rules for protecting classified 
information. During the polygraph interview, he made an effort to report every incident 
he could think of that could possibly be of security significance, even if he was unsure 
whether his actions violated information technology policy or reflected misuse of 
security systems. The facts alleged in the SOR were essentially the same facts relied 
upon by the other agency in revoking Applicant’s security clearance and eligibility for 
special access in October 2006.  (SOR; Ex. 4 at 5-6; Tr. 40-46, 90.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged, under Guideline M, that Applicant deliberately or negligently 
failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other protected 
information by placing an unclassified music disc in a classified computer. Applicant 
admitted putting the music disc in a classified computer. The incident occurred in 1998 
 
4 
 
 
or 1999, during the time that Applicant was a help desk employee. At the time, he 
worked with a group of more experienced information technology employees. His more 
experienced colleagues pointed out to Applicant that it was a security violation to insert 
an unclassified music disk into a classified computer. Applicant was caught by surprise; 
he did not realize that his action was a security violation. He initiated a discussion of the 
matter with his security officer, who confirmed that his action was a security violation 
and advised him not to do it again. Thereafter, Applicant never put an unclassified 
music disk in a classified computer. (Tr. 61-63.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that in 1999, Applicant improperly transported classified 
hard drives, zip drives and zip discs from one Sensitive Compartmented Information 
Facility (SCIF) to another, in violation of Paragraph 5-400 of the National Industrial 
Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), dated January 1995. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) 
Applicant admitted the action. He explained that he knew how to remove classified 
materials from a SCIF and was also aware of the proper wrapping procedures required 
for taking classified material out of a building. However, on the day in question, he was 
charged with moving classified material on a cart across a lobby between two SCIFs. 
He did not wrap the materials and did not know that he was required to wrap the 
materials as he took them across the lobby from one SCIF to another. A security official 
walked with him as he pushed the cart carrying classified material. She told him that he 
was required to cover the classified material as he transported it across the lobby, which 
was an unclassified space between two SCIFs. Applicant, who was new to the classified 
environment and had not previously known about the requirement, complied with it 
thereafter. He also reported this incident during his polygraph interview. (SOR; Answer 
to SOR at 3; Tr. 63-65.) 
 
 Also in 1999, Applicant removed a password list from a computer and took it to 
his home, in violation of another government agency’s security policy. This incident was 
alleged at SOR ¶ 2.b. Applicant was responsible for creating user accounts and 
passwords. After creating such a list, he put it in his back pocket, intending to take it 
back through a SCIF and to place it in a safe. He then went on to other administrative 
tasks. When he left his work site at the end of the day, he forgot that he had the list and 
inadvertently took it home with him. When he discovered the list, he burned it. The next 
day, he reported the incident to his security officer, who commended him for reporting 
the incident but did not brief Applicant on his security responsibilities. The security 
officer observed that the list was at low risk for compromise because it was not 
associated with the classified system. Thereafter, when Applicant acquired password 
lists in the course of his daily work, he put them in an envelope to remind himself that he 
had the lists in his possession and was responsible for placing them in a safe. When the 
three security incidents occurred in 1999, Applicant had not had any organized training 
in handling situations dealing with classified information that occurred during the course 
of his employment. (SOR; Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 3-4; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 2.c. that from October 2003 to October 2004, Applicant 
violated the need-to-know policy by discussing classified launch information with a co-
worker without first determining the co-worker’s access and level of clearance, in 
 
5 
 
 
violation of Paragraph 5-500 of the NISPOM. Because he believed that dates were not 
correct, Applicant denied the allegation at his hearing. (See Tr. 37-39.) Applicant 
admitted he and the co-worker had a five-minute conversation on one day, and he 
denied that he had held unauthorized communications with the individual for a 12-month 
period. Applicant provided the following additional information: 
 
We were actually cleared at the same level but I didn’t know his level- - - I 
didn’t know what programs he had been read into. So, this was again like I 
said a five-minute conversation and I made an illusion or I alluded to a 
particular launch that had something to do with a site that we both had 
supported. No classified information was discussed. But at that time I 
realized that we hadn’t had a third party introduction so I didn’t know 
whether or not he had been read into the particular program so we 
stopped talking about it and never discussed it since. 
 
(Tr. 38.) 
 
Applicant further stated: “Though no classified information was communicated, I learned 
the importance of not alluding to programs at the risk of revealing need-to-know 
information. I have never disclosed classified information to anyone without first 
determining his or her level of access before or after this incident.” (Answer to SOR, 
dated May 6, 2009, at 4.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 2.d. that each day, from February to May 2005, Applicant 
carried an unclassified floppy disc in and out of secure areas and facilities, which was a 
violation of another government agency’s security policies. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the allegation and stated that it did not constitute a failure to properly 
handle protected information or to comply with another agency’s security policy. He 
explained that he self-reported the incident and also may have discussed it in a 
polygraph interview in September 2005, but he learned later from his security officer 
that he was permitted to carry discs in and out of a SCIF as long as they were virus 
scanned and labeled “unclassified.” The person who issued him the floppy disc assured 
him that the disc had been labeled and scanned to comply with another government 
agency’s security policy. (Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 4; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 In February 2005, Applicant reported for work in a SCIF. He hung up his coat and 
forgot that he had left his cell phone in his coat pocket. At the end of the day, he put on 
his coat, put his hand in his coat pocket, and discovered his cell phone. This incident 
was alleged at SOR ¶ 2.e. (Tr. 66-67.) 
 
 Because he had heard that it was a security violation to have a cell phone in a 
SCIF, Applicant immediately went to his security officer and reported the incident. The 
security officer asked Applicant to provide an e-mail incident report, which he did. 
Applicant did not receive a security briefing or remedial training from his employer as a 
result of reporting the incident. In his answer to the SOR Applicant stated: “I discussed 
this issue with my [personnel security officer] who explained it’s a very common 
 
6 
 
 
occurrence for people to inadvertently carry their cell phone into the SCIF. I have only 
done this once unintentionally, and have since then refrained from removing my cell 
phone from my vehicle during SCIF work days.” (Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 
4; Ex. 6; Tr. 67.) 
 
 From about November 2004 to September 2005, while working as a system 
administrator, Applicant was tasked with updating operating system patches on a 
classified computer system. The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant “routinely 
transferred patches for certain operational systems from an unclassified computer to a 
classified computer system, downloading a majority of these patches from the Internet 
and placing them on . . . read/writable discs and downloading them onto a classified 
system.”  In order to accomplish this task, Applicant would copy the patches from the 
unclassified computer to a CD. After copying the patches to the CD, and before putting 
the CD in a classified computer system, it was necessary to apply a read-only software 
lock on the CD so that nothing further could be copied to it. (Answer to SOR, dated May 
6, 2009, at 2; Tr. 68-69.) 
 
 Applicant did not know he was required to apply the lock to the CD before putting 
it into the classified computer system. Additionally, on one or two occasions, he 
removed an unlocked CD from a classified computer, returned it to the unclassified 
computer, added additional patches, and added it to the classified computer again. One 
of Applicant’s more experienced co-workers explained to him that it would be an 
improper use of government equipment not to lock an unclassified CD before putting it 
in a classified computer. Applicant went to his security officer to verify his co-worker’s 
advice. Applicant received no remedial security training after this event. (Answer to 
SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 2; Tr. 70-72.) 
 
 The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.c. that in about June 2006, Applicant granted himself 
elevated domain access without prior authorization or permission. Applicant admitted 
granting himself elevated domain access, without following the regular procedure of 
requesting permission from the relevant system administrator, in order to carry out 
classified duties that mirrored unclassified duties for which he held elevated domain 
access. Applicant admitted that he did this once. He stated that while he had not been 
briefed on the issue, his common sense told him that “[i]f you want to get higher access 
and you’re another system administrator, go talk to the guy who administers that system 
and he’ll give it to you.” (Tr. 73-74.) 
 
 Applicant further explained that in his effort to get the job done, he did not reflect 
on the need to seek permission. He noted that he was responsible for performing the 
same work on the classified system as on the unclassified system, and to perform the 
work on the classified system, he required elevated domain access. In his answer to the 
SOR, he stated: “I admit making this decision was [imprudent], but that it occurred only 
once and I now frequently consult management and security before performing any 
action that may be questionable.” (Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 2-3; Tr.  74.) 
   
 
7 
 
 
 The SOR alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. that in about 2006, Applicant left his user 
account open and unattended without password protection. Applicant denied the 
allegation and asserted that it overstated the vulnerability of his account to unauthorized 
access. He explained that he was troubleshooting password and authentication issues 
on a classified system, and to complete his testing of the system, he had “to blank-out 
my account password which would enable login without typing a password.” (Answer to 
SOR, dated May 6, 2009.) 
 
 Applicant further explained that he worked on the troubleshooting and password 
issues for about a week and logged out of this account daily. He then moved to other 
assignments and forgot about the account. He remembered the account about six 
months later. When he accessed the account, he realized that it was still without a 
password. He disabled the account immediately and verbally reported the incident to 
responsible security personnel. The security officer to whom Applicant gave his verbal 
report advised him to be more careful in the future, and requested that he provide a 
written report of the incident. Applicant provided his security office with an e-mail that 
discussed the incident in greater detail.  He stated that he had checked the server and 
found no evidence that anyone had used his user name to enter the classified system 
during the time when his account had no password. Applicant received neither a formal 
notice of a security violation nor remedial training following his report of the incident, 
and his access was not revoked.  (Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009; Ex. 5; Tr. 31-37, 
73-77.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that the security concerns alleged under Guidelines M and K 
also raised security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶ 3.a.). When 
Applicant was interviewed by a polygrapher in September 2005, he tried to think of any 
possible issues that might affect his veracity or security worthiness. He told the 
polygrapher that between mid-2004 and May 2005, he drove his vehicle while 
intoxicated on at least five occasions. This behavior was alleged at SOR ¶ 3.b. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation and asserted that he had no way to 
determine if his conduct demonstrated intoxication as defined by the law of his state. 
Applicant has never been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol. He stated 
that he has not driven his vehicle when he has thought he might be intoxicated for about 
3 ½ years. (Answer to SOR, dated May 6, 2009, at 5; Tr. 43-49.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 3.c. that Applicant’s security clearance and program 
access were revoked in October 2006 by another government agency “as a result of a 
series of security violations that raised questions concerning [his] ability to protect 
sensitive and classified information.” The allegation also recited in SOR ¶ 3.c. that 
Applicant’s appeal of the revocation was denied by another government agency in May 
2007. The 2006 revocation by another government agency was based on the same 
adverse facts alleged in the SOR.  (Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant stated that in the three years since losing his security clearance, he 
had grown greatly in technical competence and awareness of his security 
responsibilities. He stated that his increased competence had led his employer to 
 
8 
 
 
entrust him with greater responsibilities, which, in turn, had led him to increase his 
technical skills. In 2007 and 2008, he took additional courses in hardware and software 
storage architecture in order to be better able to serve the information technology needs 
of his employer. (Tr. 51-53, 57.) 
 
 Applicant also reported maturity in his personal life. As the father of a large 
family, he is aware of his responsibility to lead by example. He reported that his alcohol 
intake had diminished as he assumed more familial responsibilities. He resolved never 
to drive a vehicle if he felt intoxicated. Applicant’s witness, a friend from his college 
years, praised Applicant’s moral character and integrity. The witness holds Applicant up 
as a model to his own children and tells them:  “[Y]ou need to behave as this man does. 
He does the right thing even when he’s in bad circumstances. Even to the detriment of 
himself, he does what he considers right and what is truthful.” (Tr. 44-49, 52-53, 100.) 
 
 Applicant’s current manager, who has known him for 10 years, provided a letter 
of character reference on his behalf. In her letter, the manager praised Applicant’s 
strong technical skills, ability to mentor other employees, dependability, and reliability. 
She observed that Applicant “has always been the technical backbone of the team” and 
“encourages the team to document technical processes once they have been figured 
out so that it doesn’t have to be figured out in the future.” The manager also provided 
the following observation: 
 
I understand the concerns you have listed regarding [Applicant’s] past 
actions while he had a security clearance but I do not believe there will be 
any more issues of poor judgment. I believe that some of the non-
compliance with rules regarding information technology may have 
occurred while [Applicant] was coming up to speed with working in this 
environment. Too often the system administrators are so busy with putting 
out fires that they forget the password list is in their pocket or folder and 
mistakenly go home with it still there. Sometimes in a rush to get a system 
going, they forget that carrying a classified hard drive or CD from one 
building to another is not acceptable. I do not feel that any of the issues 
that have come up in the past were done by [Applicant] with any malicious 
intent behind them. I know [Applicant] is truly dedicated to the mission of 
the work we do here and maybe he was so focused on getting the users 
back up and working so the mission could be accomplished that he wasn’t 
as careful with the smaller, yet important, security steps. 
       
(Ex. C.) 
 
 Additional co-workers, supervisors, and personal friends also provided letters of 
character reference on Applicant’s behalf. They praised him as technically proficient, 
diligent, conscientious, truthful, dedicated, and a hard worker. They identified him as 
productive and dedicated to the mission of his office. One co-worker, who has worked 
with Applicant for seven years, praised Applicant’s security awareness and respect for 
the rules and procedures that ensure data integrity. He observed that Applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
heightened conscience and desire to protect classified information led him to focus on 
past small mistakes. Another manager observed that “the overwhelming share of 
[Applicant’s] actions were proper and positive in ensuring that information was properly 
handled---only a few problems were self-reported by [Applicant], who is very diligent in 
that regard.” (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. F; Ex. G.) 
 
  Applicant’s performance evaluations from 2006, 2007, and 2008 praised 
Applicant as “conscientious and dependable.” The quality of his work was identified as 
“excellent,” “superb,” and “critical to the success of the team.” He received individual or 
small team spot awards in 2005, 2006, and 2008. (Ex. H; Ex. I; Ex. J; Ex. K; Ex. L; Ex. 
M.)  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 describes the Guideline M security concern as follows: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 Between 1998 and 2006, Applicant was involved in four incidents of 
noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to 
information technology systems. The first incident occurred in 1998 or 1999, when he 
inserted an unclassified music disc in a classified computer. The second incident 
occurred in 2004 and 2005, when he failed to put a read-only software lock on a CD 
before inserting it into a classified computer and transferring operating system patches 
copied from an unclassified source. The third incident occurred in June 2006, when he 
granted himself elevated domain status without prior authorization or permission in 
order to carry out his assigned duties. The fourth incident occurred in 2006, when 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant left his user account without password protection for approximately six 
months. These incidents raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 40(a), 40(e), and 40(f).  
AG ¶ 40(a) reads: “illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system 
or component thereof.”  AG ¶ 40(e) reads: “unauthorized use of a government or other 
information technology system.” AG ¶ 40(f) reads: “introduction, removal, or duplication 
of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information technology system 
without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations.” 
 
 There are three conditions that could mitigate Guideline M security concerns.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 41(a) might apply.  
If “the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency and 
effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s password or computer when no 
other timely alternative was readily available,” then AG ¶ 41(b) might apply.  Finally, if 
“the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt good-faith 
effort to correct the situation and by notification of supervisor,” then AG ¶ 41(c) might 
apply. 
 
 Applicant’s insertion of an unclassified music disc into a classified computer 
occurred in 1998 or 1999, soon after he began working in information technology. He 
did not know that putting an unclassified music disc in a classified computer was an 
unauthorized use of a government information technology system. When he questioned 
a security officer and learned that his action was not authorized, he never did it again.  
 
 In 2004 and 2005, Applicant carried out an assignment to update operating 
system patches on a classified computer. He did not know that he was required to use a 
read only lock on the CD containing the materials to be transferred to a classified 
computer system. When he learned from a co-worker that this was a requirement, he 
verified it with a program security officer and thereafter complied. 
 
 In 2006, he granted himself elevated domain status without prior authorization or 
permission. While Applicant had not received specific training on the subject, he 
suspected that he should request permission for elevated domain status from a system 
administrator. At the same time he was aware that his on-going duties required that he 
use and exercise the elevated domain status. In the interest of getting the job done, he 
granted himself the elevated domain status. Upon reflection, he concluded that his 
decision was imprudent. He never repeated the action, and when similar issues arise, 
he consults his security officer before initiating action. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant used his account to troubleshoot password and authentication 
issues. He blanked out his password, which enabled him to logon without typing a 
password. After working on the password and authentication issues, he signed out of 
his account and went on to another project. The account was not password protected 
for six months. No entries were made on the account and no security breaches 
occurred. When Applicant discovered the status of his account, he disabled it 
 
12 
 
 
immediately and reported the situation to his security officer. He filed a report. His 
security officer advised him to be more careful in the future. He received neither a notice 
of security violation nor remedial training.  His access was not revoked by his employer. 
 
 Three years have passed since the security concerns alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 
1.d.  Nearly five years have passed since the security concern alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b., 
and ten years have passed since the security concern alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. At his 
hearing, Applicant provided testimonial and documentary evidence to establish that the 
Guideline M conduct alleged in the SOR is not likely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
his present reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He also established that the 
alleged actions were either of a minor nature or done in the interest of organizational 
efficiency. Moreover, he established that the alleged conduct was unintentional or 
inadvertent, and it was followed by notification of a supervisor or security official and a 
good-faith effort to correct the situation. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 41(a), AG ¶ 
41(b), and AG ¶ 41(c) apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 describes the Guideline K security concern as follows: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information. . . .” 
 
 Applicant credibly established that the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. did not 
constitute a violation of another government agency’s security policy. Accordingly, that 
allegation is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 In 1999, Applicant learned that he was improperly transporting classified hard 
drives, zip drives, and zip discs from one SCIF to another on the same floor and in the 
same building. Also in 1999, Applicant removed a password list from a computer, put it 
in his pocket, forgot he had it in his pocket, and discovered it when he arrived home. In 
about 2003 or 2004, he had a brief conversation with a co-worker in which a reference 
was made to a launch. Applicant realized he did not know the co-worker’s level of 
access and he discontinued the conversation as inappropriate. In 2005, Applicant left 
his cell phone in his coat pocket in a SCIF during one work day. These actions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 34 (g), which reads: “any failure to comply with rules for 
the protection of classified or other sensitive information.”  
 
 Under Guideline K, there are three mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 35 (a) reads: “so 
much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 35 (b) reads: 
“the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now 
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” AG ¶ 
35(c) reads: “the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.” 
 
 
13 
 
 
 The incidents that gave rise to security concerns occurred in 1999,  2003 or 
2004, and 2005, and they are therefore not recent. Applicant’s security incidents 
happened under unusual circumstances; he reported them and sought clarification from 
supervisors or security officers about how to handle them properly in order to avoid 
security problems in the future. 
 
 Applicant appears to have had general periodic security briefings, but he was not 
formally trained or made aware of many day-to-day details in protecting classified 
information. In his concern to protect classified information, he remembered every 
infraction, real or suspected. However, he also took it upon himself to seek answers 
from his supervisors and security officers when he had questions about security issues 
and how to protect classified information. He responded favorably to their suggestions, 
and he now demonstrates a very positive attitude toward the discharge of his security 
responsibilities. I conclude that, when viewed in light of Applicant’s present reputation 
for care and diligence, it is not likely that similar incidents will occur in the future, and 
these incidents do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. None of the alleged security concerns resulted in the compromise of 
classified information. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 35(a), 35(b), and 35(c) apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case.  
  
Personal Conduct  
 
 “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  AG 
¶15. 
 
 Applicant argued that the allegation at SOR ¶ 3.c. was inconsistent with the 
adjudicative process specified at ¶ 2(b) in the Directive because it relied not on 
Applicant’s own conduct but on an adjudication of his security worthiness arrived at by 
another government agency. Further, Applicant argued that Appeal Board precedent 
required that an administrative judge not defer to a previous adjudication based on the 
same underlying facts unless it could be established that the other agency’s revocation 
had a security significant independent of the underlying reasons for the revocation.  See 
ISCR Case No. 03-09212 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2006). (Tr. 53-54, 123-124.)  
 
   Applicant argued persuasively that the SOR allegation at ¶ 3.c. did not identify a 
disqualifying condition under the Directive and Appeal Board precedent. I conclude that 
the other government agency’s 2006 revocation of Applicant’s security clearance did not 
have security significance independent of the underlying reasons for the revocation. 
Accordingly, I conclude the allegation at SOR ¶ 3.c. for Applicant. 
 
 The amended SOR alleged that Applicant’s failure to comply with rules and 
regulations pertaining to information technology systems and his deliberate or negligent 
failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified information also 
raised security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Specifically, allegations 
 
14 
 
 
of Appellant’s alleged personal conduct related to allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.d, and ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.e. The amended SOR alleged at ¶ 3.a. that Applicant’s 
conduct under Guidelines M and K raised doubts about his judgment, reliability, and 
ability to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 Additionally, the SOR alleged, under Guideline E, that Applicant’s self-reported 
statement that for about a year, during 2004 and 2005, he drove his vehicle five times 
while intoxicated raised security concerns. Applicant denied this allegation, pointing out 
that he had no way of knowing if he was legally intoxicated when he drove his vehicle at 
those times.  
 
 Applicant identified ten incidents, occurring during the period from 1998 to 2006,   
which he believed violated security regulations. He reported these incidents when he 
had an interview with a polygrapher. The allegations at SOR ¶¶ 3.a. and 3.b. raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 16(c), which reads:  
 
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other since guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
  
   I have considered all of the Personal Conduct disqualifying conditions, several of 
which appear to have applicability in this case.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or if it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. If “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur,” then AG ¶ 17(d) might apply. 
 
 None of the nine Guideline M and Guideline K incidents that Applicant reported 
gave rise to a written or formal security violation or to remedial training. When he 
reported these incidents to his manager or to a security officer, Applicant was advised to 
be more careful in the future. Applicant diligently sought direction from his managers 
and security officers so that he could improve his security awareness. 
 
  Applicant reported that he drove while intoxicated five times in 2004 and 2005, 
and this behavior was alleged at SOR ¶ 3.b. The record reflects that Applicant has 
never been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol. At his hearing he credibly 
stated that he no longer drinks as much as he once did, and he does not drive if he has 
been drinking. In his personal life, Applicant has taken positive steps to avoid any 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or inappropriate behavior related to alcohol use and driving. In 
 
15 
 
 
his personal and his professional life, Applicant consciously sought to avoid repeating 
behavior that he knew raised security concerns. I conclude that the mitigating conditions 
at AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
        
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He 
holds himself to a very high standard of rectitude. Several of the security incidents 
attributed to him resulted from a lack of training and information. He has learned from 
his mistakes, and he now does not hesitate to seek timely and sufficient information to 
protect the information he is entrusted with. 
 
I observed Applicant carefully at his security clearance hearing.  I found him to be 
a serious and responsible person. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future he will 
fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security 
clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that he is not a 
security risk. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant rebutted and mitigated all security concerns arising under Guideline 
M, Guideline K, and Guideline E. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:                      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d:          For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline K:            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e.:          For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:            FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. through 3.c.:            For Applicant 
 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
