KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends on appeal that he followed guidance provided by Department
Counsel in the proceedings below as a result of which he did not submit corroborating evidence
which was available to him.  Department Counsel did not address Applicant’s claim The Board
does not have authority to make factual findings.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 08-07664.a1
DATE: 12/29/2009
DATE: December 29, 2009
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-07664
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 15, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On September 24, 2009, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Mary E. Henry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether he was denied the due process
afforded by the Directive.  For reasons set forth below, we remand the case to the Judge.
The Judge found that Applicant had financial problems that began with medical expenses
occasioned by his daughter’s serious illness.  The Judge acknowledged that Applicant’s reply to the
file of relevant material (FORM) asserted that he had paid eight of the nine alleged debts and was
resolving the remaining one.  She went on to observe, however, that Applicant had  “failed to submit
any documents which show his debt payments and compliance with his payment plan.”  Due to the
absence of corroborating evidence, the Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the
security concerns in his case.
In his appeal brief, Applicant contends that he possessed such corroborating evidence.  He
states that the two credit reports in the case file were outdated, because subsequent to their
preparation he “had taken several steps towards adjudicating those debts and had done so by the time
this case was submitted to the Administrative Judge.” (emphasis added) Applicant went on to state
that he understood from Department Counsel that he did not need to submit the corroborating
evidence.  
I called [DOHA] and asked [Department Counsel] what information I needed to send
in to the Judge as my defense.  I was told that a letter stating why I did not agree with
the investigation was sufficient material and I did not have to directly respond to each
claim independently.  Therefore, with that guidance, I submitted a letter of
explanation to the circumstances which led to my situation and statement of Personal
Finances.  However, additional evidence is available to show that those debts have
been settled as of the date indicated at the time of the hearing.  Applicant Brief at 1.
  
In his reply brief, Department Counsel stated that DOHA sent Applicant a copy of the
FORM, informing him of his right to submit material in mitigation.  However, Department Counsel
did not address Applicant’s claim about the advice he purportedly gave as to the content of
Applicant’s reply to the FORM.  
Applicant’s appeal submission contains matters outside the record, and the Appeal Board
may not consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29; ISCR Case No. 08-06875 at 2 (App.
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009); ISCR Case No. 08-06518 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 3, 2009).  However, the Board has
distinguished between new evidence as to the allegations in an SOR, which is outside our scope of
The FORM states that “Applicant will be given the opportunity to submit documentary information in rebuttal1
or to explain adverse information in the FORM.” (emphasis added)  It does not define “information” to include
“evidence,” “corroboration,” etc.
3
review, and statements in an appeal which raise threshold issues of due process or jurisdiction.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-02994 at (App. Bd. May 12, 2005), which held that “the Directive does not
prohibit the Board from considering, in an appropriate case, non-record statements for the limited
purpose of deciding whether a party was wrongfully denied the opportunity to have evidence entered
into the record for the Administrative Judge to consider in a case.”  See also ISCR Case No. 06-
19169 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 2, 2007), in which the Board considered extra-record statements in an
appeal brief in order to address a dispute over DOHA jurisdiction.  
In the case presently under review, Applicant has made a claim that he relied upon advice
from Department Counsel in preparing his reply to the FORM.  Applicant contends that, in reliance
upon this advice, he did not send to the Judge evidence in his possession at the time which would
have corroborated his claims to have paid his debts.   Department Counsel’s brief does not explicitly1
address this contention, either to refute it in toto or otherwise explain it.  Consistent with the two
prior cases cited above, the Board construes Applicant’s appeal not as raising new evidence
regarding his Guideline F security concerns but, rather, as having made a claim that his right to
submit matters to the Judge in mitigation was impaired.  The parties’ submissions on appeal, viewed
in their entirety, present a question of whether Applicant was denied due process, and, because the
Judge explicitly stated that she was influenced by the paucity of corroborating evidence, the
concomitant issue of harmful error, neither of which the Board is in a position to resolve, given the
current state of the record.  See ISCR 01-23362 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-09915
(App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2004); ISCR Case No. 01-11192 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2002) for discussion of
harmful error.  
The Board does not have the authority to make factual findings.  Nor can we determine from
the record before us that Applicant’s question is without consequence.  Compare, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 06-22217 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 2008) (“The record as it now stands is inconsistent with
Applicant’s contention on appeal that she detrimentally relied on poor advice from Department
Counsel in presenting her case”).  See ISCR Case No. 05-03941 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007); ISCR
Case No. 08-00613 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009).  In similar situations, the Board has remanded
the case to the Judge to address the matter raised on appeal.  See ISCR Case No. 04-07825 (App. Bd.
Mar. 18, 2006) (Applicant’s response to the FORM not included in the record); ISCR Case No. 06-
19169, supra (Jurisdictional defect); ISCR Case No. 01-20562 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003) (Record
ambiguous as to whether Applicant was provided an opportunity to respond to a document
considered by the Judge).  Accordingly, we conclude that the best resolution of the issue raised in
this case is to remand it to the Judge.  She should reopen the record and give the parties an
opportunity to address the issue raised on appeal, bearing in mind that federal agencies are entitled
to a presumption of good faith and regularity in the performance of their responsibilities.  See ISCR
Case No. 06-06496 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2009); See also ISCR Case No. 01-22311 (App. Bd. Apr
4
4, 2003) (A party seeking to rebut the presumption of good faith has a heavy burden).  Thereafter she
should conduct further appropriate processing of the case, consistent with the Directive. 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
