                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08–06149
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Attorney At Law
December 15, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated May 19, 2006.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On April 14, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 4, 2009, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
June 22, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on July 13, 2009, and the matter was
scheduled for hearing on August 18, 2009.  The Government presented five exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection.
The Applicant presented three exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C,
which were received without objection. The Applicant called two witnesses and testified
on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 25,
2
2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 36 years old, single, and has a Bachelor’s Degree in
Bioengineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Engineer, and is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
The Applicant has an extensive history of criminal conduct and poor personal
conduct, which includes a pattern of thefts and numerous other incidents of
questionable judgment and dishonesty described below.  He graduated from high
school in 1991, and from college in 1996.  He became a partner at a defense
contracting firm in July 2004.  He  received his Secret level security clearance in 1997,
and a Top Secret clearance in 2002.  During his application process for SCI access, he
was required to take a polygraph examination.  It was during the polygraph examination
process that the information below was revealed.  In May 2007, Applicant was denied
his SCI access.  
In 1991, the Applicant was employed at a movie theater.  During the course his
employment, he and a coworker found different ways to steal from their employer.  Over
the course of a year, the Applicant stole six credit cards from wallets accidentally left by
customers at the theater and illegally used the credit cards to make purchases.  He
charged between $500.00 - $1,000.00 on each credit card over a month period before
the card was cancelled by the owner.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).
While working at the movie theater, in 1991, the Applicant obtained the
combination of one of the theater’s safes, and on two separate occasions stole
approximately $2,500.00.  Over a four to six month period in 1991, the Applicant also
stole approximately $40.00 a week from his employer through various illegal activities
such as “short changing” the customer, changing ticket sales and over-charging
concession stand items.  The Applicant also, about ten times, stole $20.00 from a
sponsored charity, which were contributions donated by customers to the employer for
the charity.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).  Applicant acknowledged that as a result
of his thefts, his employer could not determine who was stealing so the entire staff was
terminated.  (Tr. pp. 132-133).  
3
Between 1985 and 1991, while in junior high school and high school, the
Applicant engaged in petty shoplifting of items such as candy, magazines, and comic
books from liquor stores, drug stores and comic book stores.  In his own words, “I stole
a lot of things.”  (Tr. p. 132).  The Applicant explained that at the time he committed the
thefts, he wanted to make some extra money and knew he would not get caught.  (Tr. p.
85).  
From 1990 to 1993, the Applicant used false identification to purchase alcohol
while underage, and on at least one occasion used the false identification to verify
purchases he made with stolen credit cards.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).
In 1994-95, while in college and working as a student aide on a United States
military installation, (in the excess inventory department), the Applicant noticed lots of
excess computer equipment, that included mice, keyboards, old computer parts, and old
computers.  (Tr. p. 92).  A report of the Applicant’s interview dated August 21, 2006,
indicates that the Applicant stole numerous and various Government owned computer
parts over a thirteen year period.  (Government Exhibit 2).  Applicant contends that he
stole one of the laptops, and used it for his personal use, mainly for school work, since
he did not have a computer.  (Tr. p. 94).  He claims that there was a proper procedure
that could have allowed him to legally take the laptop, but he failed to follow those
procedures.  Applicant claims that he stole only one time from this employer and that
the investigator misunderstood him during the interview.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3 and
4).  
In the summer of 2005, while gambling at a casino, the Applicant won a
significant amount of $6,800, in a poker tournament.  Applicant states that the cashier
told him that he had no tax withholdings.  Despite this, he states that he knew it was
taxable income.  (Tr. p. 104-105).  He failed to claim or report the $6,800.00 of poker
winnings on his 2005 income tax return.  In early 2006, he again won a poker
tournament and a significant amount of money.  This time he won $4,000.  Again, he
failed to claim or report this $4,000.00 of poker winnings on his 2006 income tax return.
In the summer of 2007, the Applicant hired a tax preparer to clean up his tax issues.
(Tr. p. 107 and Government Exhibits 4 and 5).  Nothing was done until late 2008 or
early 2009.  Applicant was required to pay additional taxes that he has paid.  (Tr. p. 109
and Applicant’s Exhibits A and B). 
During the period from 2003 to 2005, the Applicant explained that he was
accessing computer files on a peer to peer network (allowing free access to files without
going through a central server) at home.  He downloaded numerous (not to exceed 10)
sexually explicit videos some of which were underaged females engaging in intercourse
and fellatio.  Applicant explained that he believed some of the females in the video were
underaged because they did not appear fully developed or like other pornography he
had seen in the past.  The Applicant suggested that the females in the videos might be
between the ages of 13 and 18 and that the titles of some of the videos he downloaded
were described as “underaged”.  While watching the videos, on numerous occasions
the Applicant masturbated to the underaged females sexual intercourse and fellatio.
(Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).  Applicant saved the underaged videos on the hard
drive of his computer for between two and four months, and then deleted the videos
because he was afraid he would get into trouble if he were found with the videos in his
4
possession.  (Government Exhibits 2 and 4).  Applicant explained that during the course
of this conduct, he was very careful to make sure that nobody could get into his system. 
(Tr. P. 117).  
Applicant now denies that any of the titles had the name “underaged” in them.
(Tr. p. 113).  He claims that he was not sure that the females were underaged. He also
contends that he masturbated only to the adult pornography he downloaded, and not to
the underaged female pornography.  (Tr. p. 116).  Applicant believes the investigator
may have misunderstood him or there was some mistake on the Applicant’s part.   
Two witnesses testified on behalf of the Applicant.  One of them has known the
Applicant since junior high school, over twenty years, and works in the IT Department at
a major university, the other is the President and Facility Security Officer of the
Engineering consulting firm the Applicant currently works for.  Both individuals consider
the Applicant to be highly trustworthy and responsible, and recommend him for a
position of trust.  (Tr. pp.  25-34 and 46-58). 
Letters of recommendation from program managers and systems engineer, one
of whom has known the Applicant for as much as seven years, and all of whom have
known him for at least four years, in a mixture of both professional environment at work
and in social situations, consider the Applicant to be trustworthy, diligent, dedicated,
dependable, professional, mature, reliable and ethical.  He is said to have always
properly protected sensitive, classified and proprietary information.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
C).
The Applicant realizes his mistakes of the past.  He is remorseful, humiliated and
embarrassed by his conduct.
    
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
32.(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality,
release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or
resources.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
17.(c) The offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
17.(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
6
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
17.(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
7
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct and personal conduct that demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J), and dishonesty and poor
judgment (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines J and E of the SOR.
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, disqualifying conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  I have also considered mitigation conditions 32.(a) so much time has
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 32.(d) there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.  Arguably some of the
Applicant’s criminal conduct and questionable judgment occurred many years ago, but
viewed in total, it demonstrates a pattern of misconduct that has continued over an
extended period and last occurred as recently as 2006, when he intentionally
understated his income to avoid taxes.  Stealing from his employer, its customers and a
charity, stealing a laptop computer and possibly more from the Government, shoplifting
on numerous occasions, and viewing underaged pornography on his home computer
casts serious doubt on the Applicant’s character.  Additionally, the Applicant has not
been candid or upfront with the Government.  Many of the facts that he provided the
investigator during his earlier interviews, he retracted at the hearing, and now believes
the investigator misunderstood.  I do not find this argument persuasive.  Possibly
8
brought on by embarrassment, but obviously no excuse, I find that the Applicant has not
been entirely credible or candid. 
      
Applicant’s conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct disqualifying condition
16.(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive
corporate or other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations,
and (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or
resources applies.  I have considered mitigating conditions 17.(c) The offense is so
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, 17.(d) the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur and 17.(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, but they are not compelling.  The
offenses committed by the Applicant over the years are not minor, he has received no
counseling for his behavior, and in fact he has done little other than apologize for his
greed.  The Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty of clearance
holders.  It is a negative factor for security clearance purposes if an Applicant has a
pattern of misconduct that demonstrates serious unreliability, such as is true with this
Applicant.
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.     
Given his extensive criminal history, and his numerous incidents of questionable
judgment, the most recent which occurred just three years ago, in 2006, the Applicant
clearly does not meet the qualifications of an individual that can be trusted with the
national secrets.  Assuming that he now realizes his childish, immature and criminal
behavior can no longer continue, more time is needed to ensure the Government that
the Applicant will not revert to his old ways.  Furthermore, the Applicant has not
demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does not meet the eligibility requirements for
access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). 
9
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.    
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
