                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-06209 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and 
E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 15, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 4, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 14, 2009, DOHA 
received his response. On May 5, 2009, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. 
On May 7, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. On May 14, 2009, DOHA issued a 
hearing notice scheduling the case for June 4, 2009. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through O, which 
were received without objection. I held the record open until June 19, 2009, and 
extended that date until June 24, 2009, to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional documents. Applicant subsequently submitted AE P through X, which were 
received without objection. On June 18, 2009, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant denied all allegations. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old staff engineer who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2006. GE 1, Tr. 40, 107. Applicant seeks a security clearance 
as a first-time applicant. Applicant previously held an interim security clearance, which 
was revoked as a result of these proceedings. Tr. 104-105. 
 
Applicant was awarded three separate associate degrees in electrical 
engineering, electrical technology, and telecommunications, dates uncertain. He was 
also awarded several work-related certificates. GE 1, Tr. 40-41, 105-106. Applicant 
married in August 1986, and has no children. GE 1, Tr. 104. His wife is employed as a 
licensed practical nurse. Tr. 109. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Security concerns were identified during Applicant’s background investigations 
stemming from three previous arrests in 2001, 2003, and 2006. None of the three 
arrests led to a conviction. The related charges were subsequently dismissed. 
Summarized they are: 
 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
1. October 2001 – Applicant was arrested and charged with simple 
assault. Applicant arrived home and discovered his wife was intoxicated. 
An altercation ensued, which lead to the arrest of both Applicant and his 
wife. The charges against Applicant were dismissed. Tr. 41-42, 49-68, GE 
2, GE 3, GE 4, AE T. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
2. June 2003 – Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) simple 
assault, (2) unlawful possession of a weapon, and (3) threaten to kill. 
Applicant arrived home and discovered his wife was intoxicated. An 
altercation ensued, which lead to the arrest of Applicant. The Applicant 
entered a pre-trial intervention program and was ordered to undergo a 
domestic violence assessment evaluation. The charge was subsequently 
dismissed in April 2004. Tr. 42-43, 68-80, GE 2, GE 4. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
3. October 2006. Applicant was arrested and charged with simple assault. 
Applicant arrived home and discovered his wife was intoxicated. A dispute 
ensued spanning a several day period ending in an altercation and 
Applicant’s arrest. Applicant pleaded not guilty and enrolled in a domestic 
violence abuse counseling program. He submitted an October 2007 letter 
from his case manager advising that he completed treatment and was no 
longer being monitored. The charge was dismissed. Tr. 43, Tr. 80-93, GE 
2, GE 4, AE J. (SOR ¶ 1.c.)  
 
Applicant’s wife has a long history of alcohol abuse. After each of Applicant’s 
arrests, Applicant’s wife received or participated in some form of treatment. She 
attended an inpatient detoxification program from January 14, 1997 to January 22, 
1997. She followed up with inpatient rehabilitation from January 22, 1997 to February 7, 
1997. She participated in 17 sessions and a follow-up intensive outpatient program from 
February 13, 1997 to May 12, 1997, including 13 sessions. AE Q.  
 
After the October 2001 incident, she was admitted to an inpatient rehabilitation 
program from October 25, 2001 to November 4, 2001. She voluntarily attended a 
residential inpatient drug and alcohol treatment program from November 18, 2001 to 
February 9, 2002. AE R, AE S. After the June 2003 incident, she attended a three-
month alcohol rehabilitation program. Since the October 2006 incident, she has been 
seeing a psychiatrist. GE 2. Applicant testified that since these incidents, his wife has 
“discovered religion,” which he believes contributed to her no longer drinking. Tr. 43-44, 
103-104, 108. 
 
Applicant’s wife submitted a letter in which she discussed her long-standing 
struggle with alcohol. She stated all of her husband’s arrests occurred after she called 
the police when she was drunk. She accused her husband (Applicant) of doing things 
he did not do to get him out of the house so she could continue drinking. She accepted 
responsibility for the “mess” she caused and is trying to do the right thing. She was 
baptized two years ago as a Jehovah’s Witness and tries to live according to Bible 
principles. She stated her husband is an “honest and loyal man.” AE T. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant submitted a psychological evaluation completed in May 2009 that 
addressed Applicant’s three arrests and marital conflict. The psychologist discussed 
Applicant’s history and provided a favorable psychological assessment of Applicant 
stating that his past arrests stemmed from conflicts that originated and escalated as a 
result of his wife’s drinking. He added that since Applicant’s wife has sought 
professional help and stopped drinking, these conflicts have stopped. The evaluation 
concluded that Applicant’s mental health is good and that there is no evidence that 
Applicant cannot be trusted to follow the rules and regulations of his present position. 
AE N. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR further alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts 
pertaining to his arrest record when he completed his November 2006 e-QIP. The 
pertinent question is:  
 
Section 23: Your Police Record For this item, report information 
regardless of whether the record in your case has been ‘sealed’ or 
otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception to this 
requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C 3607. c. Are there currently any 
charges pending against you for any criminal offense?;  
 
to which Applicant answered “No.” The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to list 
pending charges from his October 2006 arrest. Applicant annotated his e-QIP with 
information that he had been arrested in “01/2004 (Estimated)” for “civil simple assault.” 
GE 1, p. 25. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that his response was incorrect, but affirmatively and 
consistently denied that he engaged in deliberate falsification. Applicant’s explanation 
was thoroughly explored at the hearing. Tr. 44-46, 49-103, 111. His explanation is 
perhaps best summarized in his signed, sworn post-hearing statement: 
 
The first two arrests listed in the SOR occurred in October 2001 and June 
2003. Both charges were eventually dismissed. 
 
In or around late 2005, I approached one of the corporate attorneys who 
worked with my employer, [former employer], and asked him for 
assistance in getting the record of these two arrests expunged. At that 
time, it was common practice for company employees to receive personal 
services from various departments (legal, accounting, travel, etc.) free of 
charge. 
 
To the best of my recollection, this attorney’s name was [name of 
attorney]. [Attorney] told me that he would take care of the expungement, 
and that I would not be legally required to disclose the two incidents in the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
future. I believe he prepared the initial paperwork based on the information 
I provided. 
 
Several months later, the company fell on hard times and was forced to 
drastically reduce its expenses. Our legal service and many other non-
essential services were eliminated. [attorney] stopped all work and even 
filed a lawsuit against the company to recover unpaid fees. 
 
When [former employer] went out of business, it was my understanding 
that the expungement had been finalized before [Attorney] severed his 
relationship with the company. I did not discover the expungement had not 
been completed until the arrests came up in my clearance investigation. 
 
In an effort to track down [attorney] and verify the above, I recently 
contacted an individual who used to work in [former employer]. She told 
me she thought that [attorney] might have retired and moved to the South. 
 
I then contacted the former President of [former employer], and asked him 
if he had any additional information about my expungement request. He 
stated apologetically that he remembered the request, but thought that it 
likely fell through the cracks when the company began experiencing 
financial problems. He also stated that he did not want to open any 
communication with [attorney] because of the pending lawsuit. 
 
In October 2006, I was arrested a third time as referenced in the 
Statement of Reasons. I was charged with simple assault, which I 
understood to be a civil charge as opposed to a criminal one. This charge 
was also dismissed, but on the condition that I attend nightly meetings at a 
Domestic Violence Access Center (DVAC). 
 
The next month, I filled out an e-QIP as part of my security clearance 
application. In Section 23, I was required to provide information about my 
police record. 
 
Under Question 23(c), I was asked whether there were any charges 
pending against me for any criminal offense. While I knew that the 
October 2006 charge was still technically pending because I had not yet 
completed my DVAC program, I believed that it was for “civil simple 
assault” and therefore did not constitute a criminal offense. 
 
I checked with [senior security clerk] in the Security Office about this 
issue, and she confirmed that I only needed to disclose criminal charges. I 
have already submitted a letter from [senior security clerk] confirming that 
her understanding of my answers was consistent with what I have 
described above. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The lead Security Officer at [employer], [facility security officer], has also 
provided a statement confirming that I disclosed the arrest to [senior 
security clerk] when filling out my e-QIP. 
 
The fact that I was not trying to withhold information about the 2006 arrest 
should be clear from my response to Question 23(f). That question 
requested information about “any offense(s),” which I interpreted to mean 
civil as well as criminal offenses. I accordingly disclosed the 2006 incident, 
though I listed the date of the offense as 01/2004 due to a simple mistake 
in my recollection. 
 
I did not list the 2001 and 2003 arrests under Question 23(f) because of 
the advice I had received from [attorney]. It was my honest belief at the 
time I completed the e-QIP that I was no longer required to disclose these 
arrests for any reason. AE V. 
 
The President of [former employer], senior security clerk, and facility security 
officer from his current employer submitted statements lending support to Applicant’s 
assertions. AE P, AE U, AE W, AE X.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Two character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. The first witness was his 
company’s manager of software engineering. She has held a security clearance for 22 
years and has known Applicant since he was hired in August 2006. She described 
Applicant as an important member of her team, and his performance is “well above 
average.” She stated that Applicant has “great character,” and that “[p]eople look up to 
him, go to him for advice. He’s a good guy.” Tr. 20-21.  
 
 The second witness was his company’s director of software engineering for 
communication systems. She has held a security clearance for 31 years and has known 
Applicant since he was hired in August 2006. She described Applicant’s performance as 
“outstanding in his job duties.” Tr. 30. She stated Applicant is “an honest and ethical 
person. He’s been forthright at work.” Tr. 33. 
 
 Both witnesses were queried whether they were aware of Applicant’s arrests and 
his explanation for failing to accurately provide arrest information on his e-QIP. They 
confirmed that they were aware of his arrests and accepted his explanation of the 
underlying circumstances surroundings those arrests as well as his explanation for his 
failure to list provide accurate arrest information on his e-QIP, discussed supra. Both 
witnesses also stated Applicant is trustworthy and needs a security clearance for his 
job. Tr. 17-39. Both witnesses submitted reference letters on Applicant’s behalf that 
reiterated and expanded on their testimony. They noted that his superb performance 
has earned him a promotion, and that he has received incentive bonuses in 2007 and 
2008 that are reserved for a “select number of employees.” AE G, AE H. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 Applicant submitted a total of ten reference letters, including the two letters 
discussed supra. They include former long-term colleagues and neighbors. All reference 
letters provide compelling comments regarding Applicant’s trustworthiness, good 
character, integrity, work ethic, and loyalty. They collectively endorse Applicant for a 
security clearance. AE A – AE I. Additionally, Applicant submitted a supervisor’s 
memorandum recommending him for promotion and performance evaluations for 2007, 
2008, 2009. His promotion recommendation and performance evaluations document 
consistent and sustained above average performance with extraordinary potential for 
future service. AE K – AE M. 
 
Applicant earns approximately $92,000 a year, and owns his house free and 
clear. His house is valued at $450,000, and he has approximately $500,000 in checking, 
savings, and investments for a total net worth of $950,000. Tr. 47. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for criminal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
  
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation that Applicant was arrested three 
times in 2001, 2003, and 2006: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 Applicant was arrested for three assault charges involving domestic violence. All 
three charges were dismissed. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) are applicable. Further review is 
necessary. 
Of the five criminal conduct mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 32, two are 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) is applicable given the circumstances that the assaults are unlikely to 
recur. All arrests involved alcohol consumption by Applicant’s wife. The effects of 
alcohol have had a mercurial affect on the behavior of Applicant and his wife. 
Applicant’s wife of 23 years has a long history of admitted alcohol abuse. After 
undergoing various treatment programs, she has been able to maintain sobriety for 
approximately three years since the 2006 incident as a result of psychiatric treatment 
and religious involvement. Her alcoholism and bouts with drinking have been 
addressed. On Applicant’s part, he has undergone court-ordered treatment after his last 
two arrests, and successfully completed those treatment programs. His case manager 
assigned to his 2006 arrest stated he is no longer being monitored as of October 2007. 
Courts of competent jurisdiction dismissed all three charges. 
 
The record is void of any criminal involvement of any nature other than the 
incidents in question. Although not an excuse or exoneration for what happened, the 
offenses in question occurred when his wife was drinking heavily. Excessive alcohol 
consumption is the cause or trigger of the domestic altercations. Applicant has 
expressed remorse for his role in the altercations. His actions were clearly contrary to 
his otherwise very law-abiding behavior and reputation in the community and at work. 
 
AG ¶ 31(d) applies. Applicant has fully complied with all court-ordered treatment, 
programs. His case manager following his October 2006 arrest stated that he has 
completed his treatment and was no longer being monitored. Applicant has consistently 
maintained superior performance. He has been awarded a promotion and bonuses. 
Two of his supervisors testified on his behalf and spoke of his work ethic, honesty, 
integrity, and contribution to the defense industry. Neighbors also spoke of his good 
neighbor qualities.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false security 
clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
In November 2006, Applicant provided an e-QIP which asked whether Applicant 
had any pending arrests. Applicant incorrectly responded “No,” and disclosed in the 
remarks section that he had been arrested for “civil simple assault” in January 2004. AG 
¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply because he provided an incorrect answer about his 
pending arrest. Further review is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
Applicant consistently stated when he completed his e-QIP that he believed his 
most recent arrest was a civil matter and that he conferred with company security 
officials before submitting his e-QIP. He stated his imprecise date applied to his most 
recent and pending arrest. Not alleged under this concern, Applicant also stated that he 
did not list his first two arrests based on advice given to him by a previous company 
attorney. All of Applicant’s assertions were subsequently corroborated. Applicant 
acknowledged his answer was incorrect, but added that there was no intent on his part 
to deliberately falsify his e-QIP. Of note, he listed an assault, albeit without an accurate 
date, referring to his 2006 arrest putting the government on notice that he had an arrest 
record for assault.  
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately. An omission of relevant and 
material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. He was candid and forthright at his hearing 
about his arrests. In evaluating his testimony, I note his memory has faded over time, 
not only with regard to details surrounding his arrests, but also background information 
such as graduation dates.  
 
Applicant’s character evidence strongly supports the notion that he is an honest 
individual. Also persuasive was the testimony of his two supervisors, who stated that 
they believe Applicant to be an honest person and they accept his explanation 
regarding his failure to disclose his past arrests accurately. I conclude Applicant’s 
alleged falsification of his e-QIP is mitigated. Although he provided incorrect information 
on his November 2006 e-QIP, AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies. The falsification allegations are 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
not substantiated. I am satisfied he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose 
his 2006 arrest with intent to deceive.2  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment. 
    
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s criminal conduct. The 
arrests for domestic assault, whether or not they were dismissed is a serious concern. 
Given the alcohol history of Applicant’s wife, Applicant should reasonably have been put 
on notice that her drinking could lead to problems. When Applicant’s wife drank, her 
track record demonstrated the situation could escalate to a physical altercation. 
Unfortunately, this set of facts led to Applicant being arrested three times for assault. 
These factors show a certain level of culpability and lack of judgment on Applicant’s 
part.  
 
 
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is sufficient to warrant 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. There is no evidence of any security 
violation(s). He is well regarded by his neighbors and is a contributing member of 
society. He owns his home free and clear and has a net worth of approximately 
$950,000. His work performance record is flawless and he is held in high esteem by his 
supervisors and co-workers. Apart from these arrests, he is a law-abiding citizen and is 
a contributing member of society. He has complied with all court-ordered treatment and 
his wife has stopped drinking for approximately three years. Because of the change in 
circumstances, it is unlikely that the offenses will recur. Further, because of his law-
abiding character, it is unlikely any criminal offenses will recur. His psychological 
assessment provides for a favorable prognosis. 
 
 Applicant’s incomplete and incorrect descriptions of his past arrests placed his 
credibility into question. The government relies on each applicant for a security 
clearance to thoroughly and accurately respond to questions asked on a security 
clearance application. Information applicants provide forms the basis to grant or deny 
security clearances. Applicant’s failure to provide accurate and complete information 
required further costly and time consuming inquiries that could have been avoided. 
Fortunately for Applicant, his lack of due diligence was not imputed to be intentional or 
deliberate. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
criminal and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
PARAGRAPH 1, GUIDELINE J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c: For Applicant 
 
PARAGRAPH 2, GUIDELINE E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
