                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
 --------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 08-06319 
 SSN: -----------   ) 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1960, Applicant was born in Syria. In 1982, he immigrated to the United 
States. In 1987, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse and two children are U.S. 
citizens. However, he has retained significant connections to Syria. He traveled to Syria 
in 1984, 1995, 1997, 2007, and in June 2009. His parents and parents-in-law live in 
Syria, and he owns a share of some property in Syria. He retains a Syrian identification 
card. Foreign preference and foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. Access to 
classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing or Security Clearance Application (e-QIP version) (hereinafter 
SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On June 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security 
concerns under Guidelines C (foreign preference) and B (foreign influence) (GE 7). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 15, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (GE 8). On August 3, 2009, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On August 10, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On September 
14, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for October 13, 2009 (GE 
6). The hearing was held on October 13, 2009, as scheduled. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GE 1-5) (Transcript (Tr.) 18-19), and 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 11). There were no objections, and I admitted 
GE 1-5 (Tr. 19). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and the hearing 
notice (GE 6-8). On October 21, 2009, I received the hearing transcript.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Syria 
(Tr. 13). Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for these facts in the Administrative Notice request. Applicant and Department 
Counsel did not object to me taking administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the 
documents (Tr. 13). See the Syria section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, 
for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on Syria.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e and 2.a to 
2.p with explanations in his response to the SOR (GE 8). His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on March 22, 2007, contains a thorough 
description of Applicant’s connections to Syria (GE 2 at 3-14). 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Applicant is a 49-year-old structural engineer, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor for 19 years (Tr. 6, 21-22). His employer recently moved him into a 
position where he needs a security clearance (Tr. 22). He does not have a security 
clearance (Tr. 39). In 2006, he earned a PhD in aerospace engineering (Tr. 7). He 
teaches part-time at a university (Tr. 23). In 1997, during a visit to Syria, he married his 
spouse, who is Palestinian (Tr. 29, 30, 32).  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant was born in Syria, and lived there until he was 22 years old (Tr. 23). He 
moved to the United States in 1982 (Tr. 23). He married his first spouse in 1982, and 
they were divorced in 1991 (Tr. 31). In 1987, Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen. His Syrian passport expired in 1984 (Tr. 42-44; GE 3).  
 
In 1995, Applicant acquired a Syrian identification card or document (SID) in 
order to avoid using his U.S. passport while traveling in Syria (Tr. 44-45; SOR ¶ 1.a; GE 
8). He used the SID while traveling in Syria in 1995, 1997, 2007, and June 2009 (Tr. 44, 
49; SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 8). His SID indicates he lives in a village in Syria (Tr. 46). He used 
his SID to avoid explaining why he has a U.S. passport at every checkpoint or traffic 
stop (Tr. 44-45; GE 8). His SID minimizes the possibility that he will need to pay a bribe 
or resolve other problems with the police while in transit in Syria (Tr. 45). He did not 
believe his SID had expired (Tr. 92-93). He possesses a Syrian driver’s license, which 
expired in 1989 (Tr. 50-51; SOR ¶ 1.c; GE 8).2 
 
Applicant and his brother decided to invest in land so that eventually they would 
have vacation property in Syria. Applicant obtained his Syrian birth certificate to support 
the purchase of land in Syria (Tr. 34; SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 2.d; GE 8). In September of 2007, 
Applicant borrowed approximately $35,000 against his house in the United States and 
used the funds to purchase a 27 percent interest in some land in Syria (Tr. 25-29, 64-
65, 90-91). He does not have a mortgage on his property in Syria (Tr. 27). He does not 
own any other Syrian property and does not have any Syrian bank accounts (Tr. 29). 
His Syrian land does not have a building on it, and he intends to build a vacation home 
on it (Tr. 90-91). However, there is the possibility that they might sell the Syrian land (Tr. 
90). Applicant wanted to include his name on the title for the Syrian land to ensure 
Applicant’s children will inherit their share of the property upon his death (GE 8).  
 
Syrian citizenship is a prerequisite for property ownership in Syria (Tr. 34). 
Applicant’s children will have to apply for Syrian citizenship to inherit the property 
Applicant purchased (Tr. 34). He wanted to have his children obtain Syrian citizenship; 
however, he did not want them to serve in the Syrian military, which is compulsory for 
Syrian males (Tr. 65).  
 
 
2Although his Syrian driver’s license expired two years after Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he 
did not return to Syria until 1995 and at that time his Syrian driver’s license had expired. If the Syrian 
police asked him whether he had a Syrian driver’s license, he stated that he would just pay a bribe of 
about $4 in lieu of providing a Syrian driver’s license (Tr. 51).    
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant did not believe Syrian citizenship could be renounced, and he has not 
attempted to renounce his Syrian citizenship (Tr. 34-35). He did not make any inquiries 
about renouncing his Syrian citizenship because he did not want to risk the “wrath of the 
government” (Tr. 35).  
 
In March 2007, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant about his preference 
for Syria as compared to the United States. Applicant said his allegiance is eighty 
percent with the United States and twenty percent with Syria (Tr. 67; SOR ¶ 1.e; GE 3 
at 15; GE 8). He said he would not want to fight on behalf of the United States against 
Syria; however, he would provide civil service to the United States to assist in the war 
effort (GE 8). He was willing to assist the United States in any war to ensure the U.S. 
victory; however, he did not want to be in a position of causing direct physical harm to a 
Syrian family member, such as by shooting them (Tr. 70). 
 
Applicant denied that he had divided loyalty (Tr. 71; GE 8). He does not vote in 
U.S. elections and has not voted in Syrian elections (Tr. 101). He denied that the SOR 
contained evidence of his preference for Syria over the United States (GE 8).  He would 
not even consider living in any other country than the United States (Tr. 103).   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in Kuwait (Tr. 32). She became a Palestinian 
citizen, and then she became a citizen of Morocco through her father’s Moroccan 
citizenship (Tr. 32, 33). In 2002, she became a U.S. citizen (Tr. 33). His two children are 
ages nine and seven, and they were born in the United States (Tr. 7, 33). His children 
live in the United States, and they attend U.S. schools (Tr. 36).  
 
Applicant owns a house in the United States valued at about $270,000 (Tr. 24). 
His equity in the property is about $110,000 (Tr. 25).  He has a retirement fund with his 
U.S. company, which is valued at about $380,000 (Tr. 26). He has a U.S. bank account 
with about $10,000 in it (Tr. 26). He has about $27,000 in his children’s U.S. education 
fund (Tr. 27). He and his spouse have about $29,000 invested in other U.S. accounts 
(Tr. 28). 
 
Applicant traveled to Syria in 1984, 1995, 1997, 2007, and June 2009 (Tr. 47-50; 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c). His most recent visit was from June to July 2009 (Tr. 50). In 
1995, a person that he believed was a Syrian intelligence agent or someone in the 
military questioned him (Tr. 51-54; SOR ¶ 2.a). At that time, he lacked a waiver 
indicating he did not have to serve in the Syrian Army (Tr. 53-58; GE 8). He was 
detained in a camp, and one of his relatives obtained a waiver of military service for his 
visit to Syria (Tr. 53-58). Once his temporary waiver was established, Applicant was 
released (Tr. 54-59; GE 8). In 2007, he was sent to a Syrian intelligence office on three 
occasions for interviews (Tr. 60-61; SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 8). They checked with Applicant 
about when he arrived and when he would depart Syria (Tr. 53-56, 60-61; GE 8). He 
received a letter from the Syrian intelligence office authorizing him to leave Syria (Tr. 
53-54).  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant has not completed his mandatory Syrian military service (Tr. 66). He 
believed he could purchase an exemption for about $5,000; however, he was hoping he 
would not be required to make this financial expenditure (Tr. 66). When visiting Syria, it 
was important to obtain the temporary waiver discussed in the previous paragraph 
because then it was unnecessary to purchase a permanent exemption from military 
service (Tr. 67).  
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Syria (Tr. 41; SOR ¶ 2.e; GE 2 
at 6; GE 8). In 1990, Applicant’s parents received U.S. permanent resident cards or 
“green cards” (Tr. 39-41). Applicant sends about $250 to his parents about every two 
months (Tr. 75; SOR ¶ 2.f; GE 8). Applicant communicates with his parents on a 
quarterly basis, and they visit Applicant in the United States every two or three years 
(GE 2 at 6).   
 
Applicant has six brothers and four sisters (includes half-brothers and half-
sisters) (Tr. 37). Four of his brothers live in the United States (Tr. 36-37, 74, 75, 79, 82).  
One brother is a citizen of Syria and a resident of Saudi Arabia (Tr. 77-80; SOR ¶ 2.g; 
GE 8). Another brother is a dual citizen of Syria and the United States, who lives in 
Saudi Arabia (Tr. 42, 77-80; SOR ¶ 2.h; GE 8). He speaks to his brother in Saudi Arabia 
about once every two weeks (Tr. 94). Three of Applicant’s sisters are citizens and 
residents of Syria (Tr. 85-87; SOR ¶¶ 2.n and 2.o; GE 8). One sister is a citizen and 
resident of Syria (Tr. 81; SOR ¶ 2.i; GE 8). Applicant’s aunt (related to his father’s 
second wife) is a citizen and resident of Syria (SOR ¶ 2.k; GE 8). He has numerous 
nieces and nephews, who live in the United States, Saudi Arabia, and Syria. However, 
he does not frequently communicate with any of his brothers, sisters, nieces, or 
nephews, who live in Syria. 
 
One of Applicant’s brothers is a citizen and resident of Syria, and he is employed 
by the Syrian government (Tr. 83; SOR ¶ 2.l; GE 8). He is currently assigned or 
employed outside of Syria (Tr. 83). His brother’s wife is a citizen and resident of Syria, 
and she is employed as a teacher (Tr. 84; SOR ¶ 2.m; GE 8).     
  
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens of Palestine and 
Morocco; however, they are residents of Syria (Tr. 88; SOR ¶ 2.p; GE 8). Applicant’s 
spouse sends her parents $200 to $300 per year as gifts (Tr. 88). She talks to her 
parents about once per week (Tr. 88). She also talks to her brother, who is a citizen and 
resident of Syria, about once a month (Tr. 89). Her brother is employed by the Syrian 
government (SOR ¶ 2.j; GE 8). 
 
Applicant concluded his hearing statement by emphasizing his commitment and 
preference for the United States over all other countries stating: “I love this place. I love 
this country. This is the country of my children, [it is] my country now, my adopted 
country, and now I leave it with that.” (Tr. 113).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Character Evidence 
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records.3 He has never been fired from a job. There is no evidence that he has ever 
been arrested, used illegal drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. There 
is no evidence of any security violations, or work-related rule violations.  
 
Syria4 
 
Syria borders on Iraq, Israel, Syria, Turkey, and Lebanon. Syria is approximately 
the same size as North Dakota. Syria’s population is about 19 million people. 
 
Officially Syria is a republic; however, in reality it is ruled by an authoritarian 
regime. Syria is included on the U.S. State Department's List of State Sponsors of 
Terrorism. There are several known terrorist groups in Syria. The government of Syria 
continues to provide political and material support to Hezbollah and Palestinian terrorist 
groups. Several terrorist groups maintain their offices and some of their leadership in 
Syria. In addition, the government of Syria permits Iran to transfer weapons and 
supplies through their country to assist terrorists in Lebanon. Syria is one of the main 
transit points for foreign fighters entering Iraq. A travel warning for Syria warns about 
the risks of terrorism due to the September 2006 attack on the U.S. embassy in 
Damascus. Syrian forces killed the four individuals who attacked the U.S. embassy in 
2006. There have been other attacks on the U.S. Ambassador's residence and the U.S. 
embassy in 1998 and 2000. 
 
The United States instituted economic sanctions against Syria due to their active 
and passive support of terrorism in the Middle East. No commercial aircraft owned or 
operated by the Syrian government may take off or land in the United States. There are 
human rights abuses in Syria that include: systematic repression of Syrian citizens' 
ability to peacefully change the government; arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life; 
torture and physical abuse of prisoners and detainees; arbitrary arrests and detentions; 
restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association; government 
corruption; and violence and discrimination against women. Torture is occasionally 
used, including against foreign citizens. Security personnel have placed foreign visitors 
under surveillance, have monitored telephones, and have searched hotel rooms and 
possessions of foreign citizens.  
 
 Syria opposed the Iraq war in 2003, and foreign relations between Syria and the 
United States deteriorated. In 2005, the United States withdrew its ambassador to Syria 
after the assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri.   
 
 
 
3 The source for the facts in this paragraph is his security clearance application (GE 1). 
 
4The facts in the section concerning Syria are from the Department Counsel’s documents 
submitted for Administrative Notice and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, 
Background Note: Syria, May 2007 (Enclosure I). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines C (foreign preference) and B (foreign influence) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
In 1987, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. He continues to retain a Syrian 
identification card or document (SID). He retains the SID for convenience when he visits 
Syria. He used his SID during his visits to Syria, or had it available for use, if he was 
stopped by the Syrian police. He retained the SID to avoid questions about why he was 
in Syria, and his presentation of a U.S. passport to Syrian traffic police would cause 
problems and possibly detention until his status was verified. He retained his Syrian 
citizenship to protect his interest in his Syrian property either for himself or for his 
children’s potential inheritance. His SID shows his residence as a Syrian village, rather 
than his address in the United States. AG ¶ 10(a)(5) applies.  
 
When Applicant obtained a Syrian birth certificate as indicated in SOR ¶ 1.d, he 
did not implicate a security concern under Guideline C. The issue of his Syrian birth 
certificate is more appropriately resolved under Guideline B. Applicant’s expression in 
SOR ¶ 1.e of an 80 percent allegiance to the United States and a 20 percent allegiance 
to Syria is not an expression of preference for Syria over the United States. Applicant’s 
hearing statement clarified that the 20 percent allocation for Syria does not mean he 
would make any decision against U.S. interests. However, his retention of Syrian 
citizenship as manifested by retention of a current Syrian SID, retention of a Syrian birth 
certificate, and retention of an ownership interest in land located in Syria does show 
some foreign influence and whole person concerns, which are addressed beginning at 
page 10, infra.   
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
AG ¶ 11(e) applies and mitigates any concern about Applicant’s possession of a 
Syrian driver’s license. His Syrian driver’s license is expired and was never valid while 
he was in Syria after becoming a U.S. citizen. None of the other mitigating conditions 
fully apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.      
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) apply. Applicant, his parents, his parents-in-law, 
his brothers, sisters, and numerous nieces and nephews were born in Syria. Many of 
them of them live in Syria or have close connections with family members living in Syria. 
One brother-in-law is a Syrian government official. Applicant has particularly close 
connections with his mother and father. His spouse has close connections to her 
parents and brother.  He shares living quarters with his spouse. Applicant has an 
interest in property in Syria amounting to about $35,000.   
 
Although Applicant’s communications with most of his siblings and other relatives 
living in Syria are not particularly frequent, he does have a sufficient relationship with his 
parents because of communications, visits, and his payment of funds to raise a 
concern. His spouse has frequent, non-casual communications with her parents living in 
Syria, and provides funds to them. She has frequent (monthly) communications with her 
brother. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not 
rebutted this presumption. Applicant’s relationship with his parents, his wife’s 
relationship with her parents, and her relationship with her brother are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” These relationships with residents of Syria create a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” any family members who are in Syria. For example, if terrorists 
or the Syrian Government wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert 
pressure on his parents. Applicant is also subject to potential, indirect coercion through 
his spouse’s relationship with her parents and her brother. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Syria, is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Syria with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Syria, and his spouse’s relationships with her family 
members living in Syria, do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into 
a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
a desire to assist a family member living in Syria, or to assist his spouse, who might be 
coerced through a family member living in Syria.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Applicant has an 27 percent interest in a property in Syria that he purchased in 
September 2007 for about $35,000. This interest is sufficient to raise a security concern 
under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Syria seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his spouse, or their 
family members living in Syria, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities, and 
Syria has a problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in 
Syria, or who are very likely to return to Syria, creates a potential conflict of interest 
because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire 
to assist his spouse, or their family members living in Syria should they be endangered 
by terrorists by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his parents or his spouse’s 
contacts with her parents living in Syria and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) apply, and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to Syria in 1984, 
1995, 1997, 2007, and June 2009. His visit from June to July 2009 was recent and of 
substantial duration. He was repeatedly interviewed by either Syrian intelligence or 
military personnel. He has never served in the Syrian military and is vulnerable to 
conscription or being forced to pay for a waiver of military service. Applicant has 
frequent contact with his parents, who live in Syria. However, he does not have frequent 
contacts with his siblings who live in Syria. His relationships with his siblings in Syria are 
mitigated under AG ¶ 8(c) because his contacts and communication with them are so 
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. However, because of his connections to Syria, to his parents, 
and to his in-laws, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives who are Syria citizens] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
family connections to the United States. His spouse, two children, and two brothers live 
in the United States. His spouse and two children are all U.S. citizens. Applicant owns a 
house in the United States, has substantial investments in the United States, and has a 
bank account in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members who 
either live in Syria or spend extended periods of time visiting Syria. He frequently 
communicates with his parents and less frequently with his siblings. His spouse 
frequently communicates with her parents and brother. There is no evidence, however, 
that terrorists, criminals, the Syrian Government, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his family in Syria to coerce Applicant or his 
family for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets for improper 
coercion or exploitation. While the government does not have any burden to prove the 
presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ contentious recent relationship with 
Syria, and especially Syria’s support for terrorist groups and systematic human rights 
violations. Syria’s conduct makes it more likely that Syria would coerce Applicant 
through his family, if Syria determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Syria. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in Syria. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to mitigate the security concern raised by his property interest 
in Syria. In comparison to his property interests in the United States, and his 
employment in the United States, the value of his property in Syria is such that it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, 
or pressure him. However, this mitigating condition can only fully mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with his 
parents, and his spouse’s relationships with her parents and brother. These relatives 
live in Syria and are readily available for coercion. A lesser concern remains because of 
his trips to Syria, his use of the SID to avoid inquiries from traffic police, and his 
contacts with Syrian intelligence or military officials. His contacts with Syrian intelligence 
or military officials and multiple trips to Syria highlight their knowledge of Applicant, and 
raise his profile while in Syria. The Syrian government’s antipathy towards the United 
States and failure to follow the rule of law further increase the risk of coercion.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. Applicant 
immigrated to the United States in 1982. Applicant received his post-graduate education 
in the United States. In 1987, he became a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s spouse became a 
U.S. citizen in 2002. His two children were born in the United States. His children live in 
the United States, and they attend U.S. schools. Two of his brothers and their families 
live in the United States. 
 
Applicant has substantial property and employment connections to the United 
States. The same U.S. defense contractor has employed him for 19 years. His house in 
the United States is valued at about $270,000. His equity in the property is about 
$110,000.  He has a retirement fund with his U.S. company, which is valued at about 
$380,000. He has a U.S. bank account with about $10,000 in it. He has about $27,000 
in his children’s U.S. education fund. He and his spouse have about $29,000 invested in 
other U.S. accounts. 
 
Applicant does not have frequent contacts with his siblings who live in Syria. 
There is no derogatory information concerning his police or financial records. He has 
never been fired from a job. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, 
illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. He loves the United States 
and wants to raise his children in the United States. He considers the United States to 
be his home, and not Syria.  
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of a clearance for Applicant are 
more significant than the factors weighing towards grant of his clearance. Some of 
Applicant’s brothers and sisters, as well as his parents, parents-in-law, and brother-in-
law live in Syria. He has frequent contact with his parents and provides funds to them. 
His spouse has frequent contact with her parents and brother, and provides funds to her 
parents. He traveled to Syria in 1984, 1995, 1997, 2007, and in June 2009. He owns a 
share of some property in Syria. He retains a Syrian identification card. Syrian 
intelligence or military officials have repeatedly detained and questioned him.    
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Syria must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Syria, as well as the dangers existing in Syria.5 The danger of 
violence or coercion from terrorists in Syria and the threat of coercion from the Syrian 
government makes coercion and abuse more likely than in many other countries. 
Terrorists continue to threaten the interests of the United States, as well as those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. Syria has provided support for terrorist groups 
and shown some hostility towards United States efforts in Iraq, Israel, Palestine, and 
Lebanon.       
 
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor, sincerity, and honesty at his hearing, I conclude he has not 
mitigated the foreign preference or foreign influence security concerns. 
 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
16 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”6 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.e: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant (duplicates 2.c) 
Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.e and 2.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.g to 2.i:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.k to 2.o:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
   
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
