DOHA makes trustworthiness decisions for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions1
defined in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987. DOHA
decides ADP cases under the policies and procedures established by Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive) and the revised adjudicative guidelines (RAG) effective within DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 08-09203
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 14 April 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under
Guideline F.  Applicant answered the SOR 2 July 2009, requesting a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 28 August 2009, and I convened a hearing 23 September
2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 30 September 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 46-year-old
infrastructure analyst employed by a defense contractor since February 1997. He will
2
have access to sensitive medical data. He has not previously had a trustworthiness
determination. He has two adult children with his first wife, whom he divorced in October
1999, and a six-year-old son with his second wife, whom he divorced in July 2007.
The SOR alleges, government exhibits substantiate, and Applicant admits, 21
delinquent debts totaling over $43,000, falling delinquent between 2003 and the
present. Most of the debts are small: 12 are less than $500 each. However, Applicant
has made no efforts to resolve the debts, and is unlikely to do so in the future.
Applicant acknowledges making poor financial judgments in the past, but also
attributes his financial problems to multiple separations and reconciliations with his
second wife beginning in 2003 and culminating in their divorce in July 2007. Initially, his
ex-wife had custody of their son, but Applicant was given custody in August 2008 amid
allegations of domestic violence in the home where the ex-wife lived with her new
husband. There is some possibility that she will be ordered to pay Applicant child
support. However, it seems unlikely that she will pay voluntarily if child support is
ordered.
Applicant has received no financial counseling and has attempted no debt
consolidation or resolution. He has made no payments on his debts and acknowledges
not knowing where to start. He has considered filing for bankruptcy protection, but lacks
the spare funds to pay the filing fees. He hoped to be able to start addressing his debts
once his educational loan garnishment was completed in July 2009, but the fluidity of
the situation with his son and ongoing legal expenses have made that impossible.
Applicant submitted no character or employment records. The case record
suggests that few people are aware of his financial problems.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an applicant’s suitability for public trust positions. Administrative judges must
assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the
facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial
commonsense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a), the “whole person”
factors. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative for or against applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should
be followed where a case can be measured against them, as they represent policy
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to sensitive information. Considering
the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Public trust determinations resolve whether it is clearly consistent with national
security to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for public trust positions. The
government must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence,
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶ 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (b) . . . the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent3
to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that4
it is  unlikely to recur.
¶ 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and5
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications6
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.7
3
against access to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or
mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a right to eligibility the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to public trust information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with national security” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. While some of Applicant’s
financial difficulties are reasonably attributable to the long process of separation and
divorce from his second wife, he has been unable to take effective action to address his
debts despite being employed full time since February 1997. However, his debts were
also due to his irresponsible spending.3
Applicant potentially meets only one of the mitigating factors for financial
considerations. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, indeed they are
ongoing.  While his second divorce and getting custody of his son were clearly4
circumstances beyond his control, he has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts
since then, having not even resolved several small debts.  Further, he remains unable5
to live within his means. In addition, there is no evidence that he has sought credit
counseling or otherwise brought the problem under control.  There is very little6
evidence, and no corroboration, of any good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  Finally,7
given his unwillingness to seek or use financial counseling, there is nothing in the record
to suggest that Applicant will put his financial problems behind him. I conclude Guideline
F against Applicant.
4
Beyond the specific guidelines alleged by the government, the generally
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions lead to the same result. Applicant is
presumably a responsible adult, who nevertheless appears unsophisticated about his
finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubt about Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial problems.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-u: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for a public trust
position for Applicant. Eligibility for ADP position denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
