                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-12176
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On June 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2009, and elected to have her case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 14, 2009, and submitted information within the 30 days
permitted to respond.  The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2009.   Based
2
upon a review of the case file,  pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated 25 delinquent
debts, exceeding $17,000, in the following SOR paragraphs:1.a ($542);1.b ($120); 1.c
($316);1.d ($99);1.e ($729); 1.f ($40); 1.g ($943); 1.h ($57); 1.I ($197); 1.j ($652); 1.k
($2,223); 1.l ($7,898); 1.m ($800); 1.n ($127); 1.o ($19); 1.p ($656); 1.q ($121); 1.r
($.1,155); 1.s ($276); 1.t ($89); 1.u ($656); 1.v ($45); 1.w ($43); 1.x ($73); and 1.y
($82).  
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged debts.  She
denied responsibility only for the debts listed in subparagraphs creditors 1.l and 1.v.
She claimed she paid these debts in full. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old entry-level financial manager for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant was born on a foreign military installation to an active-duty Air Force
service member and a foreign national (see Items 3 and 11).  She was raised in a
populous state and attended local schools (ex. 11).  In May 2002 (at the age of 19), she
went to work to support herself and her family.  Records show that between May 2002
and September 2002 she was employed by a private company as a production worker.
For the ensuing two years (between September 2002 and May 2004), she was
employed in a management position for a local food service company (see ex. 3). 
In April 2006, Applicant was employed by a temporary service as a supervising
financial specialist, and then leading accounting technician for a DoD financial
accounting services agency. She was unemployed again for about six months between
July 2007 and January 2008, and survived on basic subsistence.  Since August 2008,
she has been employed as an entry-level  financial manager for a DoD contractor (see
Item 3).       
Applicant married in July 2003 at the age of 20 and has three children from this
marriage, ages 1, 8, and 10 (see Items 4 and 5).  She divorced her husband in July
2007 (see Item 1), and has shared joint custody with her ex-husband since their
separation in 2005.  As a result of their joint custody arrangements, Applicant has never
received child support from her ex-husband.  Applicant’s eldest child currently resides
with her aunt and uncle for part of the year (Item 5). 
3
During her marriage, Applicant provided most of the financial support for her
family.  Her husband had a difficult time holding a job and never contributed much to
the family’s financial needs.  By most accounts, Applicant was the only regular working
member of her household and incurred most of the family’s debts in her name.       
Applicant separated from her husband in June 2005, after she learned of his
affair with another woman (see Items 5 and 11 and response to FORM).  The affair hurt
her considerably, and the divorce process that followed caused her a good deal of
stress. 
Providing most of the financial support for her ex-husband and their three
children since they established a joint household together in 2000, Applicant became
very upset over her ex-husband’s disposition for accumulating credit card debts before
their marriage, and not paying them.  Applicant assumed these debts as well as her
own debts, and by the time they married in July 2003, she had paid off her ex-
husband’s pre-marriage credit card debts (ex. 11).  Once married, Applicant opened all
of their accounts in her name exclusively, including their apartment, utilities, and all of
their other household expense items.  Her ex-husband declined to share any of their
household debts, or medical expenses associated with the treatment of their young
son.           
While still married to her ex-husband, Applicant enrolled in a local community
college.  She attended this community college from July 2005 through September 2005.
She financed her semester’s expenses with a student loan (see Item 11). Due to
injuries she incurred from an auto accident during the semester, she could not attend
classes for an extended period.  Her class absences created academic difficulties for
her, and she was forced to withdraw from school (Item 11). Records show she attended
classes at another college between March 2007 and May 2007, and returned to the
same community college for two months between April 2008 and May 2008 (Item 11).   
As a part of their November 2007 divorce agreement, Applicant agreed to be
responsible for her student loan, her Visa account in her name (approximately $1,200),
and her overdraft  fees on her own bank account (Item 11).  In turn, her ex-husband
assumed sole responsibility for the accumulated medical bills associated with the birth
of their youngest child (around $2,000).     
Applicant’s ex-husband never paid his agreed share of their accrued marriage
debts.  As a signatory on the accounts, Applicant has had to bear the responsibility for
paying these debts that her ex-husband defaulted on. Because of her unemployment
experiences, she has struggled to keep up with all of her accrued delinquencies. Credit
reports list accumulated delinquent debts exceeding $17,000. 
Applicant has worked with credit counseling firms to arrange workable payment
plans with her limited income sources, but has not been able to meet the established
payment schedules set for her.  Still, she has been able to document the payment of
4
two of her listed creditors (creditors 1.l and 1.v), and has established contact with most
of her remaining creditors.  Based on her personal research of the debts listed in her
creditor reports, she claims two of them are duplicates (creditors 1.p and 1.u). Her
claims appear to be well founded and are accepted. 
Asked to identify all of her listed debts in her credit reports, Applicant could
identify some, but not all of her listed debts.  With her current job (if she can retain it),
she expects to be able to repay the remaining $9,000 in delinquent accounts within two
years (see response to FORM).  Most of these remaining listed debts involve medical
charges associated with her son’s treatment, which her insurance carriers failed to pay
(see Item 11 and response to FORM).  Without any assistance from her ex-husband,
Applicant assures she will pay these bills as well, once she returns to work.  
Applicant is well regarded by her supervisors and (see response to FORM).  One
former manager described Applicant as an outstanding accounting technician, and an
employee who displays excellent team-building skills and professional relationships. He
credits her with maintaining high ethics and standards                                        
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
5
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case.
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
6
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious entry-level financial manager of current and prior
defense contractors  who accumulated a number of delinquent debts during a difficult
marriage between 2003 and 2007. Forced to support her entire family while balancing
schooling pursuits, she fell behind with not only her own debts, but her ex-husband’s
debts as well.  Her accumulation of delinquent debts and her past inability to satisfy
these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable primarily to her shouldering all of her family’s
financial responsibilities out of necessity during her marriage, while caring for her
children, attending college.  She managed to stay abreast of her bills, even her ex-
husband’s, but fell behind in her payments during recurrent periods of unemployment.
She has been able to resolve several of her largest accrued bills (including the $7,898
debt owed to creditor 1.l), and is committed to paying the balance of her bills once she
returns to work.  While most of the remaining listed debts remain unsatisfied, they are
small enough to resolve once she returns to full time employment with her prospective
defense employer. 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, extenuating circumstances
associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve her debts are amply
shown.  Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.”
                                         
Holding a security clearance does involve a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).  
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is
required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While
7
the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases. Failure of any applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve
his debts when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about whether the
applicant has demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
 In Applicant’s case, she recognizes her fiducial responsibilities and her need
to maintain responsible control over her finances.  She commits  to resolving her
debts as soon as she is financially able to do so.
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debts. Since her finalized divorce
from her ex-husband, she has shown considerable effort in addressing her debts and
has managed to eliminate two of her listed debts this past year: one for $7,898 and
the other for $45.  She has provided exemplary service to her employers (past and
present), and has continued to address her debts in the face of experienced adversity.
She acknowledges that resolution of her remaining delinquent accounts is a critical
prerequisite to her regaining control of her  finances, and she is determined to pay all
of them (save for the claimed duplicate debt covered by subparagraph 1.u) once she
returns to work.
When evaluating an applicant’s promise to pay off debts in the future, the
Appeal Board has placed a good deal of emphasis on the applicant’s ability to
establish a “meaningful track record.”   See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
May 21, 2008). This established track record does not mean, though, that an
applicant is required, as a matter of law, to establish that he or she has paid off each
and every debt listed in the SOR.  Under this requirement, an applicant need only
demonstrate that he or she has “established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems
and taken significant actions to implement the plan.”  See id. 
Under the facts presented, Applicant has not only established a reasonable
plan to resolve her listed debts, but she has paid some of them and committed herself
to paying the others seasonably once she returns to work.  Her good-faith efforts meet
the action plan requirements developed by the Appeal Board.   
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, her concerted efforts to resolve them with her limited
resources, and her documented payment of two of her largest debts, Applicant is able
to carry her evidentiary burden and mitigate the Government’s financial concerns.
Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.y.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the 2(a) factors enumerated in the AGs.
8
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.y:                  For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
