1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10460
SSN: --------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant answered and signed his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on
July 16, 2008. On June 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 14, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
DOHA received the request and assigned the case to me on September 18, 2009. On
October 5, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for October
27, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted four
exhibits (GE) 1-4, without objection. Applicant presented 13 exhibits (AE) A-M, without
objection. He testified on his own behalf. At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open
2
until November 10, 2009. Applicant submitted a packet of receipts which was marked
AE N and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received
on November 5, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.l and 2.a of the SOR. He admitted the allegation in ¶ 2.b of the SOR. 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school and obtained an undergraduate degree in 1973. Applicant is married and
has four children. He has worked for his current employer since June 2008.
In late 2004, Applicant was unemployed for eight months. He obtained several
contract jobs that were sporadic. His income was greatly reduced and he could not pay
all his bills. Applicant used his retirement savings to help pay his bills as long as he
could. He relocated to find work. His wife became ill in 2006 and incurred many medical
bills. She does not work outside the home (Tr. 11). She is now on disability. Prior to his
unemployment, Applicant earned $72,000 a year and did not have any financial
difficulties (Tr. 36).
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, including medical accounts. The
approximate total for Applicant’s debts is $52,000 (GE 3). The current status of
Applicant’s delinquent debts is described below.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for a collection account in the amount of $4,097.
Applicant settled the account for $2,900. His final payment is in December 2009 (AE A).
Applicant is in repayment status for the alleged debt in SOR ¶ 1.b for $10,181.
He pays $488 monthly on the debt. The balance is $3,439 (AE B). 
Applicant pays $257 monthly on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The balance
owed is $6,753. This amount may be reduced in the next months by the credit union (Tr.
25).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for $4,555 is a student loan that he cosigned for
his son. He is paying $100 a month on the loan (AE D). 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e for $19,733 is the result of a voluntary
repossession. Applicant could not pay the $539 a month car loan when he lost his job in
2004 (Tr. 27). He had made payment on the car for approximately 18 months before he
returned the vehicle to the dealer. The automobile was resold by the dealership.
Applicant has formally disputed the amount. He is waiting an accurate accounting of any
balance that might be due (AE N). 
3
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f for $326 was settled and paid (Tr.30).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is for $240. This is a credit card account.
Applicant paid the account in full (AE F).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a phone account for $651. Applicant paid the
account (AE N).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a medical bill for $145. This is paid (AE I). 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is for another medical bill that was paid in full in the
amount of $130 (AE J). 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k for $4,200 is paid. This represented money owed
to a former landlord (AE K).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l refers to the voluntary repossession in allegation 1.
e.
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $8,145 (GE 2). He is current
with his monthly expenses. His net monthly remainder is approximately $439. He has a
savings account (GE 2). He has no credit cards. He began repayment of his debts as
soon as he obtained full-time employment. He has also been paying medical bills that
are not covered by any insurance for his wife (Tr. 40). His son requires medical care for
a health issue. This has required Applicant to pay many bills over a sustained period
(AE N).
When Applicant completed his July 16, 2008 security clearance application, he
read question 27 concerning any property repossessions and answered “No.” He
explained that since he had made payments on his car until his unemployment forced
him to return the vehicle voluntarily to the dealership, he did not consider that he had
any property “repossessed.” He was credible in his explanation (Tr. 33). In that
application, he answered “No” to question 28a concerning financial delinquencies in the
last seven years over 180 days, and “No” to question 28b concerning financial
delinquencies over 90 days (GE 1). Applicant knew he had outstanding debts, but did
not have any financial information with him and was unclear as to the exact situation.
He now realizes that he should have answered that question in the affirmative (Tr. 34). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on many accounts for a
period. His credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant
acknowledged that he had many things happen in 2004 that caused his financial
difficulties. He had also provided for his family and was responsible. This mitigating
condition applies in part. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Before 2004, Applicant
did not have financial difficulties. When he lost his job and could not find work for almost
eight months, he incurred delinquent debts. He also had his wife’s illness and his son’s
health problems which required a substantial outlay of money. When he found
employment, he was receiving a lower salary. He did not find a permanent position until
2008. At that point, he began repaying his delinquent debts. He also had to turn in his
vehicle after he had made payments for almost 18 months. The car was sold, but he
has not been given credit for the sale which would reduce the amount of debt reported
on his credit card. He is disputing the amount and attempting to obtain an accurate
amount that he will pay. Applicant has acted responsibly in paying his accounts under
the circumstances.  This mitigating condition applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received formal financial counseling. He has
resolved his debts and is not shirking payment on the voluntary car repossession. He
disputed the amount and is actively working on resolving the issue. He entered into
repayment status and has been consistent so far. His efforts are sufficient to carry his
burden in this case. I conclude these mitigating conditions apply.
6
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” As discussed above, the $19,000 for his
vehicle is in formal dispute. He provided documentation for this assertion. I conclude
this mitigating condition applies.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, when Applicant completed his 2008 security application, he did not
answer “yes” to questions 27 or 28. He denied the allegation concerning a falsification
of his answers. At the hearing, he stated that he answered the questions to the best of
his ability and did not know realize at the time the information was not accurate. He
incorrectly answered the questions but he did not intentionally falsify his application. 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the Government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must
consider the record evidence as whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission
occurred. ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in
ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). Thus, AG ¶ 16(a) does not
apply in this case. I find for Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.a.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are insufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant has worked all his life. He supported his
family. His wife and son have medical concerns. He never had financial difficulties
before his unemployment in 2004. He acted responsibly in handling the delinquent
debts when he obtained permanent employment. He has resolved the delinquent debts
through his repayment plan. He answered questions 27 and 28 concerning financial
delinquencies in the last 7 years to the best of his ability. He did not intentionally falsify
his SF 86.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: through 1.l: FOR Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
