 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-12181 
                                                            )                                                                                          
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Peter J. Jeffrey, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on August 26, 2008. On May 15, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 9, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for October 21, 2009, was issued 
September 17, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 4 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and called one witness. He introduced 22 exhibits, which were 
identified and marked as Ex. A through Ex. V and admitted to the record without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 29, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant admitted the allegation and offered additional information. He 
denied that the allegation raised security concerns under AG F. Applicant’s admission is 
admitted as a finding of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and employed as a computer programmer and 
application developer by a government contractor. He has provided contract services to 
a U.S. government agency for approximately 11 years. His gross annual salary is 
approximately $160,000. He attended college for about two years, but he has not 
earned a degree. He has held a security clearance since 1998. (Ex. 1; Tr. 41-44, 60-
63.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States and became naturalized U.S. 
citizens. Applicant and his two brothers and two sisters were born in the United States. 
Applicant is his parents’ second oldest child and first-born son. Applicant’s father works 
as a radio technician with a communications company. His mother, who has recently 
become disabled by blindness, worked as an administrative clerk in a physician’s office. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 65, 85-86.) 
 
 When Applicant was in high school, he lived with his family in an eastern state. 
His parents rented a home. They did not discuss their salaries or financial 
circumstances with their children. In 1999, Applicant was no longer living at home and 
was employed in another part of the United States. His parents contacted him and told 
him they had an opportunity to purchase the home they had been renting. They asked 
Applicant, who was then about 21 years old and earning a good salary, to purchase the 
home in his name and they would, in turn, pay the monthly mortgage on the property. 
Applicant agreed, and he alone signed the mortgage. He and his parents did not commit 
this agreement to writing. All mortgage documents and payment books were sent to the 
parents at the home address. When the parents sought to refinance the property in 
August 2007, Applicant signed a document appointing his mother as his attorney-in-fact 
and authorizing her to exercise a specific power of attorney to refinance a loan secured 
by real property. (Ex. R; Tr. 45-48, 64-66, 79, 87-88.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant and his wife were married in June 2008. Soon thereafter, Applicant’s 
wife became pregnant, and the couple began to think about purchasing a home. They 
checked their credit reports to assess their financial strength. When he looked at his 
credit report in July 2008, he was surprised to find several delinquent accounts: a VISA 
credit card account, with a balance of $8,000, for which payment had not been made for 
three months; a line of credit loan, with a balance of approximately $2,500, for which 
payment had not been made for two months; and an American Express credit card 
account, with a balance of $5,000, which was in collection status.1 (Tr. 50-52.) 
 
 The delinquent debts identified on Applicant’s credit report belonged to his 
parents. They had not told Applicant of their financial difficulties. Applicant identified the 
Visa account as one his father had opened in Applicant’s name several years ago. 
Applicant used the card but maintained a zero balance. He thought the card had expired 
and the account was closed. However, he learned that the card had been activated and 
used, without his knowledge, by his parents, and they had accumulated a delinquency 
of $8,000 in his name.2 (Tr. 50-51, 88.) 
 
 Applicant identified the line of credit as associated with the home mortgage that 
he had signed in 1999. He concluded that his parents had incurred the line of credit 
delinquency of $2,500. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s father was responsible for the American Express delinquency. 
Applicant was an additional cardholder on the account. When the account became 
delinquent, the creditor sought payment from Applicant. (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit report also showed that his parents were past due on the 
mortgage payments for the house he had purchased for their use. In August 2008, 
Applicant reported on his e-QIP that the mortgage arrearage was $8,303. Applicant’s 
credit bureau report of September 2008 showed a delinquency of $11,070 on a 
mortgage account of $318,000. The SOR, relying on information found on Applicant’s 
March 3, 2009, credit report, alleged that the total arrearage on the mortgage debt of 
$318,000 was $27,677 and that the mortgage had been placed in foreclosure. (SOR ¶ 
1.a; Ex. 2; Tr. 54.) 
 
 After learning of the delinquencies, Applicant sought an explanation from his 
parents. His parents were unable to explain why the delinquent debts had not been 
paid. Applicant contacted the credit card companies to close the accounts, and he 
requested that all future statements be sent to him at his address and not to his parents. 
He then sought a way to satisfy the debts. (Tr. 53.) 
 
 
1 The two credit card debts and the line of credit debt were not alleged on the SOR. 
 
2 The parents also used, without authorization, a credit card in the name of one of Applicant’s younger 
brothers. The brother discovered a delinquency of approximately $6,000 on the credit card at about the 
same time in 2008 that Applicant discovered the delinquencies in his accounts that were attributable to 
his parents. (Tr. 86-87.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant established a monthly payment plan to pay down the Visa debt. His 
personal financial statement of September 30, 2009, shows a balance of $4,900 on the 
account, with scheduled monthly payment of $166 and an actual payment of $400. 
Applicant paid the American Express delinquency of $5,000 in full, and the account was 
closed by the creditor (Ex. U; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant asked his father to help to retire the line of credit debt. The father said 
he would pay $100 a month on the debt. Applicant’s personal financial statement of 
September 30, 2009, shows that Applicant is also paying $100 a month on the debt. 
(Ex. U; Tr. 54.) 
 
 Applicant contacted the company holding his mortgage and learned that his 
parents had requested and received a loan modification but had failed to make the 
required payments. The lender requested full payment of the loan from Applicant. (Tr. 
55.) 
 
 Applicant did not have enough money to pay the full amount of the delinquency. 
The mortgage holder would not accept any monthly mortgage payments until the 
arrearage was satisfied. Applicant considered paying the arrearage, but he was not able 
to meet the monthly mortgage payments that would be required thereafter, and he could 
not trust his parents to make them once the arrearage was satisfied.  (Tr. 79-81.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife struggled to find a way to resolve the situation. At one 
point, they concluded that the only realistic option was foreclosure. In a letter, he stated: 
 
I realize a foreclosure is a drastic step, but in a situation like this my wife 
and I feel it is the only choice that makes sense since we have our own 
family to support and cannot afford to support my parents. This would also 
cut me [off from] all financial ties with my parents and I will be able to 
slowly build up my credit once again. 
 
 (Ex. E) 
 
   Although no payments have been made on the mortgage loan since 
approximately March 2008, and the property is in pre-foreclosure status, Applicant’s 
parents have remained in the home. Applicant and his wife consulted with a real estate 
attorney, who advised them to attempt a short sale of the property. In order for Applicant 
to list the property in a short sale, it would be necessary for Applicant’s parents to 
vacate the premises. The parents have refused to leave the house, after repeated 
demands by Applicant and his wife that they vacate. Applicant and his wife have hired 
an attorney who specializes in eviction actions to represent them. On September 24, 
2009, their attorney sent Applicant’s parents a certified letter demanding that they 
vacate the property and advising them of legal action should they not comply. If his 
parents do not voluntarily comply with Applicant’s request to vacate the property, he will 
authorize eviction proceedings. (Ex. 3; Tr. 48, 55-57, 83-84.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. She is employed by a federal defense 
agency, and she was granted a security clearance by her agency in December 2008. 
During the investigation of her security worthiness by her agency, Applicant’s wife 
provided detailed information about her husband’s delinquent mortgage and the actions 
of his parents. (Tr. 82, 99-102.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife provided a financial statement dated September 30, 2009. 
Their total combined net monthly income is $13,400. They reported fixed monthly 
expenses of $4,050. Their combined monthly debt payments are $7,158. They have a 
net monthly remainder of $2,192. (Ex. U.) 
 
 Applicant also reported $11,000 in savings and approximately $50,000 in his 
401(k) plan. He stated that he intended to use these resources to satisfy any deficiency 
that might arise from foreclosure or a short sale of the property. (Tr. 58.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisors and co-workers provided letters that praised his technical 
skills in computer programming. Supervisors called his work performance “outstanding.” 
A co-worker who has worked with him for ten years stated: “[Applicant] became highly 
respected in our organization and was sought after for his knowledge, skills, and 
abilities in information systems.” He has received several certificates of appreciation for 
innovative computer applications. (Ex. G; Ex. H; Ex. I; Ex. J; Ex. K; Ex. L; Ex. M; Ex. N; 
Ex. O; Ex. P; Ex. Q.) 
     
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
 
6 
 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant, as a young man, acceded to his parents’ request that he 
take out a mortgage in his name on a property that they resided in. They promised to 
make the monthly mortgage payments on the property, but they failed to do so and did 
not advise Applicant of their inability to pay. As a newlywed, Applicant learned that his 
parents had not only failed to pay the mortgage, but they had used credit cards and 
made additional unauthorized charges in his name. Because of his parents’ actions, 
Applicant was legally responsible for a financial delinquency of at least $27,677. This 
evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a financial delinquency related to a mortgage loan on a 
property he purchased for his parents in 1999. Although there was no written 
agreement, the parents agreed to make all of the mortgage payments. All mortgage 
correspondence was sent to the parents. Applicant lived in another part of the country 
from his parents, and he was not aware of their financial situation or their failure to pay 
the mortgage. Applicant’s parents’ actions were beyond his control. 
 
Once he learned that his parents had incurred delinquencies in his name, 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. He contacted the credit card 
creditors and made arrangements to pay them. He set up a payment plan to satisfy the 
line of credit debt. When his father agreed to pay $100 a month on the delinquency, 
Applicant, knowing his father’s payment history, also paid the creditor $100 each month. 
 
8 
 
 
The mortgage delinquency presented significant financial and familial difficulties. 
Applicant lacked the resources to pay the mortgage debt of $318,000 in full. While he 
could have satisfied the arrearage, he did not have the resources to continue to pay his 
parents’ monthly mortgage debt, and he could not trust them to pay it in the future. 
When he asked them to vacate the property so that he could list the home for a short 
sale, they refused to cooperate. Despite these difficulties, Applicant and his wife have 
moved forward, sought legal counsel, and have taken action to resolve the debt 
responsibly. 
 
Applicant was caught in a severe downturn in the real estate market and, 
unfortunately, he was misused by his own parents, whose refusal to meet their financial 
obligations reflected poorly and unfairly on Applicant. This is an unusual circumstance, 
unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant has learned, through experience, some hard financial lessons. He has 
also acknowledged his financial responsibilities and has made good-faith efforts to 
satisfy his creditors. His own financial record reflects reasonable risk-taking and 
responsible financial behavior. He continues to try to resolve a financial obligation he 
did not seek. He has identified savings and money in his 401(k) plan that he will use, if 
necessary, to satisfy a deficiency arising from a foreclosure or a short sale of the 
property. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply in mitigation 
to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 31 years old and a 
 
9 
 
 
highly skilled computer programmer. He has worked as a contract employee serving the 
same federal agency for 11 years. His supervisors and co-workers value his skills and 
abilities; they consider his work to be outstanding. Applicant has held a security 
clearance, without incident, since 1998. 
 
Applicant’s wife also holds a security clearance and is employed by a federal 
agency. She, like Applicant, realizes the importance of financial responsibility, and she 
has fully disclosed Applicant’s financial situation to security personnel in her agency. 
Applicant and his wife have every reason to be prudent, reliable, and resourceful in their 
personal and professional lives. Applicant’s financial problems began when his parents 
failed to honor a commitment they made to him. Applicant and his wife responded to 
this setback with energy and determination. I observed Applicant carefully at his 
hearing; I assessed his credibility; and I carefully reviewed the record evidence in this 
case. I have no doubt that he will honor any legal financial obligations that arise from 
signing the mortgage on his parents’ home. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future 
he will fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security 
clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that he is not a 
security risk. 
 
Applicant is a serious and responsible person. He has shown good faith in 
contacting his creditors and working with them to resolve or alleviate his indebtedness. 
He is currently living within his means and paying attention to his financial obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                                For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it  is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                               
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
