                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10786 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is financially overextended and does not have the means to overcome 
her financial problems. She failed to mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2008, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On March 
9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as modified and 
revised.1 The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (Financial 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or 
revoked. 
 
On April 15, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested an 
administrative determination. Department counsel converted the case to a hearing on 
May 22, 2009. At her hearing, Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge (Tr. 20). The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 25, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled 
on July 14, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 8 (AE 8 was received post-hearing), which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 21, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old senior systems analyst employed by a defense 
contractor. She finished high school in 1987. Between 1987 and 2007, she completed 
approximately two years of college, but she has not earned a degree.  
 
Applicant was hired by her current employer in February 2008, and she received 
interim access to classified information pending completion of her security background 
investigation. This is the first time she has had access to classified information. She is 
the program manager for a government contract, and supervises a team of software 
developers. There is no evidence that she has ever compromised classified information 
or that she has caused others to do so.  
 
Applicant married her husband in March 1998 and they were divorced in May 
2004 (GE 1, Tr. 36). She has two sons ages 13 and 17. Her youngest son was born of 
this marriage and her oldest son is from a prior relationship. Applicant testified she has 
been the sole provider for her older child since he was born and the sole provider for the 
younger child since she separated from her ex-husband in 2001. Applicant testified she 
has received almost no financial assistance from either father. She maintains her 
children in sports and music activities. Her older son is in the process of applying for 
 
Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 
2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
college. Applicant intends to provide financial assistance to her son while he attends 
college. 
 
Applicant is proud that she has been continuously employed since age 21. She 
believes she has done well and that her job progression shows an advancing career 
with great experience and increasing responsibilities. She testified that, through the 
years, she has always handled sensitive data and has never misused or 
misappropriated the information. She considers herself to be an asset to her employer 
and has been awarded the highest compliments from customers and her employer. The 
government customer requested Applicant by name to be assigned to her current 
position. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems, past and present, to three main 
causes: her separation from her ex-husband in 2001 and the subsequent 2004 divorce, 
the lack of financial support from both fathers of her sons, and her lack of financial 
responsibility. She admitted she knew her expenses exceeded her income and, 
notwithstanding, she continued to incur additional debt without paying for the older 
debts (Tr. 81). Because of her limited income, she could not afford to pay both her past 
financial obligations and her current day-to-day living expenses.  
 
In her July 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed having 
financial problems. Her background investigation addressed her financial status and 
included the review of her July 2008 and February 2009 credit bureau reports (CBRs), 
her response to DOHA interrogatories, and her two security clearance applications.  
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent and/or charged off accounts, totaling 
approximately $36,000. Applicant’s testimony and the record evidence show that all the 
alleged SOR debts are her debts, and they have been delinquent for a number of years.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.k, and 1.l alleged three state tax liens totaling approximately 
$25,588, for taxes owed for tax years 1998 through 2004. Applicant contested the 
charges and the state conceded their charges were not accurate. The state reduced her 
tax lien debt to $6,129. At her hearing she testified that she was in the process of 
negotiating a payment plan with the state. After her hearing, Applicant claimed she had 
hired a tax attorney to help her re-file her taxes for the years in question to challenge 
the state’s tax assessments. She provided no documentary evidence to support her 
assertions. SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.m alleged the same debt ($917) in collection by two 
different collection agencies. 
 
In February 2009, Applicant entered into a debt consolidation program to resolve 
her delinquent obligations. She needed assistance to establish contact with her 
creditors, negotiate payments, and make a payment plan. Most of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are being paid through her debt consolidation program, including the 
10 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j, and 1.o. Her documents show she has been 
making some progress paying her debts. Based on her payment plan, she anticipates 
being debt free in 45 months.  
 
4 
 
 
 
It is important to Applicant to correct her credit, particularly now with her son 
soon to enter college. She intends to increase her contributions to her payment plan 
when her salary increases. Applicant claimed she paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n; 
however, she presented no documentary evidence to support her claim. 
 
Applicant’s evidence shows that prior to entering into the debt consolidation 
program she negotiated and paid a delinquent $2,396 debt (GE 2, Tr. 49). Applicant 
disclosed she has two joint delinquent debts for $17,148 and $5,000, which were not 
alleged in the SOR. She and her ex-husband purchased two vehicles that were later 
repossessed. Applicant believes both she and her ex-husband should be financially 
responsible for these debts. She is negotiating with him and hopes he will pay part of 
the debt. She is not making payments on these two debts.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial problems. She claimed she has 
learned from her mistakes and will not repeat them. She believes she is doing all she 
can do under her circumstances to resolve her debts. She now has a working budget, 
which she follows, and she is being more financially responsible. Applicant received 
financial counseling through her credit consolidation program. Prior to February 2009, 
she had not participated in any financial counseling. 
 
In 2006, Applicant sold her 1998 Ford Explorer and bought a 2005 Nissan Xterra 
for approximately $28,000. She has a $607 monthly payment she testified that she 
could barely afford. She explained she made a mistake purchasing such an expensive 
vehicle, but at the time she believed the purchase of the vehicle would assist her to 
reestablish her credit. 
 
As of February 2009, her monthly take-home pay was around $5,000, with 
monthly expenses of approximately $4,327. She has been paying approximately $280 a 
month into her debt consolidation program, which leaves her a remainder of 
approximately $393 a month. This does not include any payments towards her state tax 
debt ($6,129), the $22,148 she jointly owes with her ex-husband for the two 
repossessed vehicles, and future expenses she anticipates she will incur when her son 
enters college.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
2  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent and/or charged-off accounts, totaling 
approximately $36,000. All the alleged SOR debts are Applicant’s debts, and have been 
delinquent for a number of years.  
 
Applicant successfully contested three state tax liens totaling approximately 
$25,588, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.k, and 1.l. The state reduced her tax lien debt to 
$6,129. Applicant claimed she hired a tax attorney to help her re-file her taxes for the 
years in question to challenge the state’s tax assessments. She provided no 
documentary evidence to support her assertions. SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.m alleged the same 
debt ($917) in collection by two different collection agencies. AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
7 
 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant entered into a debt consolidation program to resolve 
her delinquent obligations. The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through j, and 
1.o, are being paid through her debt consolidation program. She has been making some 
progress paying her debts. 
 
 Applicant established circumstances beyond her control contributed to her 
inability to pay her debts, i.e., her marital separation and divorce, and the failure of the 
fathers of her two sons to provide financial support. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but does 
not fully mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant admitted she made many mistakes 
and that her failure to be financially responsible contributed to her current financial 
problems. She knew that her debts exceeded her income and, notwithstanding, she 
continued to incur additional debt without paying for the old debts. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Since February 2009, Applicant has made some efforts to resolve her debts. 
Notwithstanding, at this time, her recent efforts are not sufficient to fully mitigate the 
financial security concerns. I also find she is barely making ends meet. She is financially 
overextended and her financial problems are not under control. Although Applicant is 
addressing 10 of her debts through a debt consolidation program, she has no plan in 
place to pay her $6,129 tax lien debt. Additionally, she has three other non-SOR 
delinquent debts, totaling approximately $22,223, which she has not addressed. 
Moreover, Applicant will soon be trying to provide financial support to her son for his 
college expenses. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), and (d) do not fully apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are not yet under control and her delinquent debts are likely to recur. Although 
she receives full credit for participating in financial counseling, having a budget, and 
entering into a debt consolidation program, these measures are insufficient because her 
plans only address about $10,000 in delinquent SOR debt. About $28,000 in delinquent 
debt is not addressed.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is attempting to correct her 
financial situation by contacting her creditors and participating in a debt consolidation 
program. She successfully challenged and reduced her three tax liens debt to $6,129. 
She has been successful working for defense contractors and the government from 
February 2009 to present. There is no evidence she has ever compromised classified 
information or committed any security violations. Applicant expressed remorse for her 
financial mistakes and promised to repay her creditors. She established circumstances 
beyond her control contributed to her inability to pay her debts. These factors show 
some responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. 
 
 On balance, I conclude Applicant presented insufficient evidence of having a 
track record of financial responsibility. She presented documentary evidence of recent 
efforts to pay her financial obligations or to resolve her debts; however, there are not 
clear indications that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. Her 
inability to pay even relatively small debts shows she is financially overextended. Her 
2006 purchase of a large, expensive vehicle shows lack of judgment. She does not 
have the financial means to resolve her financial problems without substantially 
reducing her expenses.  
 
 Applicant is committed to providing financial support to her son for his college 
education. This additional expense makes it unlikely she will be able to pay the $28,000 
in debt that is not included in her payment plan. Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l,    
    and 1.n and 1.o:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
