 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11087 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), based on six delinquent debts totaling about $27,217. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 11, 2008. On April 
27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 4, 2009; answered it on July 20, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
 
2 
 
 
27, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 8, 2009, and the 
case was assigned to me on September 10, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
September 14, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 7, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection, and Applicant testified. I kept the record open until October 23, 2009, 
to enable Applicant to submit documentary evidence. She timely submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A and B, and they were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on October 16, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old technical illustrator employed by a defense contractor. 
She attended an art institute from March 1992 to March 1994 and received an 
associate’s degree. She has worked for her current employer since April 2008. She is 
also self-employed as a freelance graphic designer. She has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in April 1999 (Tr. 31). She and her spouse separated in 
November 2007, and for about a year she hoped for a possible reconciliation (Tr. 32). 
As of the date of the hearing, she was saving money for attorney’s fees (Tr. 41). After 
the hearing, she contacted an attorney with a view toward filing for divorce (AX A; AX 
B).  
 
 For about 18 months before their separation, Applicant’s husband was 
unemployed for most of the time. She testified he “would either get fired, or he would 
quit after a month or two.” She decided to separate because her husband was 
irresponsible and would not contribute financially to the marriage (Tr. 39). 
 
The debts alleged in the SOR were joint debts incurred during their marriage, 
and they have not yet reached any agreement on responsibility for resolving the debts 
(Tr. 31). As of the date of the hearing, she had taken no action to resolve the debts (Tr. 
33). She has not sought or received financial counseling (Tr. 35, 42).  
 
 The SOR alleges an unpaid utility bill for $261 (¶ 1.a), a medical bill for $307 (¶ 
1.b), a credit card account for $871 (¶ 1.c), and an installment contract for camera 
equipment for $1,347 (¶ 1.e) (Tr. 27-29). The two largest debts are a line of credit for 
$7,431 (SOR ¶ 1.d), and $17,000 deficiency from the repossession of a truck (SOR ¶ 
1.f). These two debts were incurred in 2005, before Applicant and her husband 
separated, and both were connected to his attempt to start his own business to design 
and construct kitchens and bathrooms. The business failed (Tr. 33-35). 
 
 
3 
 
 
After the hearing, Applicant contacted the collection agency for the medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. According to her post-hearing letter (AX A), she asked the 
representative of the collection agency about the $307 balance alleged to be due and 
was informed that “they did not have any information regarding that balance.” She was 
questioned about this debt by a security investigator in July 2008 (GX 2 at 7), and asked 
about it in DOHA interrogatories in February 2009 (GX 3 at 3), and in both instances 
she indicated she did not know anything about it. The credit report reflects that the date 
of last activity on this account was in February 2005 (GX 4 at 1). 
 
 Applicant testified her take-home pay is about $2,400 per month. She lives with a 
married couple from whom she rents a master bedroom. She drives a four-year-old car. 
Her living expenses are about $1,400, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $1,000 
(Tr. 37).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
4 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Three potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(e) (“consistent spending beyond one=s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis”). Applicant’s financial history raises 
these three disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
 
5 
 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous and not yet resolved. They occurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur, because she has separated from her 
husband, whose irresponsibility was the primary cause of her financial problems. 
However, her lack of any meaningful action to resolve the debts, some of which are 
almost five years old, raises doubt about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I conclude this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s current financial 
problems were the result of her husband’s financial irresponsibility, which was beyond 
her control. However, she has not acted responsibly to address the debts. She was 
questioned about the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b by an investigator in July 2008 and in 
DOHA interrogatories in February 2009, and both times she indicated she would 
investigate it, but she made no inquiries until after the hearing. She has not made any 
effort to resolve any of the other debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received any 
financial counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant has not initiated any effort to resolve her debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established. Although Applicant has repeatedly questioned 
whether she owes the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, she has done nothing to 
dispute it. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. She presented herself as articulate, intelligent, 
candid, and sincere, but she acquiesced in her husband’s business venture and 
assumed responsibility for two substantial loans, even though she knew he was 
financially irresponsible. She has taken no meaningful actions to resolve her financial 
problems.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
