1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10157
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns arising from his
delinquent finances and falsification of two security clearance applications. Clearance is
denied.
On May 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
E, Personal Conduct, H, Drug Involvement, and F, Financial Considerations. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2009, admitting all of the allegations
except those set forth in SOR subparagraph 1.c and 1.e. He requested a hearing, and
2
the case was assigned to me on September 10, 2009. On September 22, 2009 a Notice
of Hearing was issued scheduling the case for October 14, 2009. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. I received six government exhibits and Applicant’s testimony.
The transcript was received on October 19, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old single man with two children, ages 11 years and eight
weeks. He was married from 2006 to 2009 (Exhibit 1 at 22). The marriage ended in
divorce in March 2009. Applicant’s oldest child is a product of his marriage, and the
infant is the child of his fiancee with whom Applicant currently lives. Applicant has
physical custody of the 11-year-old child.
Applicant attended junior college in 1996. He withdrew before earning a degree,
then re-enrolled in four-year college in 2000 (Exhibit 4 at 3). He attended college for four
years, but did not earn a degree (Tr. 19). Since leaving college, Applicant has worked
as a security guard for two successive contractors at the same facility (Tr. 19). 
Applicant used marijuana from 1995 to 2004 (Tr. 20). He smoked once in high
school in 1995 and used it at parties while in college (Tr. 20). Applicant’s marijuana use
“kind of carried over” into his career (Tr. 20) In 2004, Applicant’s employer administered
a random drug test (Exhibit 4 at 12). Applicant failed it, testing positive for marijuana
(Id.). His employer then placed him on probation for 90 days (Id.). Applicant’s employer
administered two more random drug tests, and Applicant passed both (Id.). 
Applicant attributes his 2004 marijuana use to depression that stemmed from
problems he was having with his then girlfriend (Tr. 21). He has not used marijuana
since 2004.
In September 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application
(Answer). He answered “no” to Questions 27 (Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug
Activity - Illegal Use of Drugs  Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is
shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance . . . ?), and 28 (Your Use of
Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity - Use in Sensitive Positions  Have you EVER
illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement officer,
prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security clearance; or while in a
position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?). 
In May 2008, Applicant completed another security clearance application, and
again, failed to disclose his past marijuana use either in response to Questions 27 or 28
(Answer). He also did not disclose this information when he met with a security
clearance investigative agent the following month (Answer).
Applicant testified that he did not disclose his marijuana use on his 2004 security
clearance because his supervisor told him that “it was between me and him, and that it
wouldn’t show up on my record, and he would keep it off my record” (Tr. 23). He did not
3
disclose the marijuana use on the 2008 application or to the investigator because he
“did not want to lose [his] career as a security officer” (Answer at 2).
Applicant owes eight creditors approximately $14,000 of delinquent debt (see
generally, Exhibits 5-6). Approximately $13,200 constitute student loans (SOR
subparagraphs 3.b - 3.e). Applicant owes the remainder to utility companies, (SOR
subparagraphs (SOR subparagraphs 3.a, 3.f, and 3.i), and a credit card company (SOR
subparagraph 3,g).
SOR subparagraph 3.a is a cable television bill for $452 stemming from
Applicant’s marriage (Tr. 26). In response to government interrogatories propounded in
February 2009, Applicant indicated that he planned to begin paying this bill through a
payment plan beginning March 2009 (Exhibit 3 at 8). He provided no evidence that he
has been making any payments.
Applicant contends that he had arranged payment plans to satisfy the debts
listed in SOR subparagraphs 3.b, 3.f, and 3.g, but was unable to adhere to them
because he “had to pay mortgage, gas, [and] other bills,” and his funds “haven’t been
that great” (Tr. 26, 27). 
Applicant denied the debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 3.c, 3.d, and 3.e. He
contends that he paid them through wage garnishments. He provided no supporting
evidence (Tr. 24). Applicant has not yet begun making payments to satisfy the $140
phone bill listed in SOR subparagraph 3.h (Tr. 27).
Applicant attempted to consolidate his debts through a debt management
company (Tr. 35). He did not specify when he considered this option. He chose not to
pursue the debt consolidation option because the debt management company would
not include all of his debts in the proposed plan (Tr. 35). For the past month, a family
friend has been helping Applicant manage his finances (Tr. 35-36).
Applicant maintains a budget (Tr. 28). He has approximately $500 remaining
after expenses. His budget does not account for any of the SOR debts (Tr. 38).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
4
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate (AG ¶ 15).
Applicant intentionally omitted information about his drug involvement history
from his 2004 and 2008 security clearance applications, and during a 2008 interview
with an investigative agent. The following disqualifying conditions apply:
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.
Applicant’s contention that his supervisor advised him not to list his failed drug
test on his 2004 security clearance application conceivably triggers AG ¶ 17(b):
5
the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused
or significantly contributed to by improper advice of authorized personnel
or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual
cooperated fully and truthfully.
Applicant’s explanation for omitting his failed drug test or drug involvement history from
his 2004 application contradicts his explanation for omitting his drug involvement history
from the 2008 investigative process. Consequently, I conclude his contention that he
relied on his supervisor’s advice when completing the 2004 security clearance
application is not credible. Moreover, Applicant presented no evidence establishing that
his supervisor was authorized to advise him on the completion of his security clearance
application. AG ¶ 17(b) is not applicable.
Although Applicant’s contention that he omitted his drug involvement history from
the 2008 security clearance application is more credible than his explanation for
omitting the information from the 2004 application, it does not mitigate the security
concern. Fear of losing one’s job does not justify falsification (DISCR OSD No. 89-1586
(October 26, 1990) at 4). 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug . . . can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24).
Applicant’s history of marijuana use and his failed drug test trigger the application
of AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use.” After
failing the drug test in 2004, his employer administered two more random drug tests. He
passed both, and has not used marijuana since the episode that triggered the failure of
the drug test. AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and AG ¶ 26(b)(3),
“an appropriate period of abstinence,” apply.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Here, Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
6
Only two of Applicant’s delinquent bills, collectively less than $1,000, relate to his
separation and subsequent divorce. Applicant accrued the student loan debts before he
was married, and did not testify to any relationship between these debts and his
divorce. AG ¶¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” does not apply.
Applicant has made minimal progress toward satisfying his delinquencies, and
acknowledges that financial hardship has derailed previous efforts to satisfy his
delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(c), “. . . there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved, or is under control,” does not apply.
Applicant contends that he satisfied several of the SOR delinquencies through
wage garnishments, but provided no supporting documentation. Assuming that
Applicant’s contention is true, such payments do not constitute “good-faith effort[s] to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” sufficient for AG ¶ 20(d) to apply.  
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s marijuana use was infrequent. Moreover, nearly five years have
elapsed since he last used it. His marijuana use no longer poses a security concern. 
Conversely, Applicant repeatedly omitted information about his marijuana use
during the course of two security clearance investigations over a four-year span of time.
This conduct undermines his credibility, thus minimizing the probative value of his
promises to get his financial situation under control. Upon evaluating this case in the
context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the drug
involvement security concern, but failed to mitigate the personal conduct and financial
considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: FOR APPLICANT
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
