DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) effective within DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-00403
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 4 August 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F.  Applicant answered the SOR 1 September 2009, requesting a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 28 August 2009, and I convened a hearing 28 October 2009.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 3 November 2009.
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 28-year-old processing engineer
employed by a defense contractor since September 2008. He has not previously held a
clearance.
2
The SOR alleges, government exhibits confirm, and Applicant admits, a single
delinquent collection account of about $16,000. The debt originated as education loans
Applicant took out while he was in college.
Applicant received his undergraduate degree in June 2005. After a six-month
grace period, he should have begun repayment on the loan, but did not. Three factors
contributed to his failure to begin repayment. First, he graduated from college without a
job and was underemployed once he obtained employment. Second, he was unaware
of the provisions of his loan that might have provided deferment or forbearance of
repayment because of his financial situation. Finally—and most important—he was
financially immature and simply did not comprehend the ramifications of his financial
irresponsibility. Consequently, he let his education loan go into default.
Applicant’s financial naivete extended to other areas of his life. He opened credit
card accounts without considering his ability to repay the accounts. Facing layoff from
his employment, he stopped paying on the cards, which also fell delinquent. He was
unemployed from February to September 2008, which exacerbated his financial
problems.
After he obtained full-time employment in September 2008, Applicant began to
realize he would have to deal with his financial problems. However, he waited until he
had saved some money before approaching his creditors. He eventually settled some
outstanding accounts and brought other accounts current. His credit reports reflect
numerous accounts that were delinquent, but are now current.
Applicant entered into a rehabilitation agreement with the creditor holding his
education loan. His initial loan balance was about $25,000, but capitalized interest
increased the balance to just over $28,000. However, in a year’s time, Applicant
reduced the balance to just over $17,000 (AE C). At the time of the hearing, Applicant
had rehabilitated the loan, which was then transferred to a different lender to resume
normal payments. Nevertheless, as of the date of the hearing, Applicant had missed the
payment date for the new lender by two weeks.
Applicant began his loan rehabilitation in December 2008 with a lump-sum
payment of $3,000-4,000, followed by monthly payments of $500. His new monthly
payment amount was $160, but Applicant intended to continue the $500 monthly
payment. His post-hearing submission (AE D) reflects that he made the first payment
electronically at the end of October 2009, and had submitted the necessary paperwork
to start automatic monthly deductions from his checking account. Meanwhile, he
intended to continue to make monthly electronic payments until the automatic payments
began.
Applicant’s finances have improved to the point that he and his brother were able
to jointly buy a house in 2009. His character references (AE A) consider him honest and
trustworthy.
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.2
3
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial commonsense consideration of the whole-person factors listed in RAG ¶
2(a). The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative for or against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should
be followed where a case can be measured against them, as they represent policy
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering
the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F.
Applicant candidly acknowledged that he was financially naive and irresponsible coming
out of college and let his education loan become delinquent. His financial situation was
further eroded by a brief, but significant, period of unemployment.  However, when he2
obtained full-time employment in his career field and realized the importance of
straightening out his finances, he embarked on a sensible plan to repair his credit, and
has largely executed that plan—to the point where the only SOR allegation was his
delinquent education loan which had been referred for collection
Applicant satisfies important aspects of the mitigating factors for financial
concerns. While his financial difficulties were both recent and multiple, they were
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that3
it is  unlikely to recur .
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and4
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20 (c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications5
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. For6
this factor to apply, there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and evidence of a good-
faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling his debt, which is present here as to his
student loan.
4
confined to a relatively short period.  The debts were largely not due to circumstances3
beyond his control, but he acted responsibly in addressing his debts once he obtained
permanent employment in his career field.  Similarly, while he did not seek credit4
counseling, he pursued a responsible repayment program and has brought the problem
under control.  He also has a plan that addresses the remaining debt faster than the5
creditor requires. Further, the record reflects a good-faith effort to satisfy debts that
were not alleged in the SOR, as well as the single debt that was alleged.  I conclude6
Guideline F for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.  
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
