1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-01103
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant answered and signed his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on
July 28, 2008. On July 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 26, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. I
received the case on September 18, 2009. On October 1, 2009, a Notice of Hearing
was issued scheduling the hearing for October 30, 2009. The hearing was convened as
scheduled. Department Counsel submitted five exhibits (GE) 1-5, without objection.
Applicant introduced four exhibits (AE) A-D, without objection. The documents were
admitted into the record. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I left the record open until
2
November 6, 2009, so that Applicant could submit additional information. He submitted
an additional packet which was marked as AE E, without objection. The transcript (Tr.)
was received on November 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.p of the SOR with explanation. 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the
United States Air Force from 1970 until 1991, when he retired (AE E). Since April 2008,
Applicant has been employed as a Facility Manager with his current employer (Tr.18).
He has held a top secret clearance since 1988 (Tr. 19). Applicant has more than 30
years of employment in his field. He is married and has four stepchildren (GE 1). 
In 2005, Hurricane Katrina devastated the area where Applicant worked as a
project manager. For two years, Applicant stayed with his 68 employees who lost
almost everything. As a result of the devastation, his wife, who is older and has some
health issues, left the area and moved to another state. During those two years (until
June 2007) he provided for himself and his wife living in another state (Tr. 21). This
created financial difficulties above and beyond the havoc that the hurricane created. His
wife was retired and living on a fixed income. Applicant was supporting her and paying
household expenses for two residences.
Applicant used a credit card to help pay for expenses. He was not able to pay his
bills in a timely manner. Prior to July 2005, Applicant had no difficulties with his financial
situation. He had no debt and was earning a good salary (Tr. 23). His credit was good.
Applicant’s mother and father died during this very difficult time. His mother died
right before Katrina. His father died in 2007. He explained that he was taught how to be
responsible and was not happy with the situation that occurred with his finances. 
Applicant was candid explaining the horror that occurred after the hurricane. He
tried to help his employees, three of whom had nowhere to live. The interruption of daily
life was incredible. He expended most of his energy trying to stabilize his employees
and to help the work project. He arranged for donations from his family around the
country for some employees in an amount of $2,000 (Tr. 44). He attempted to carry on
a daily existence despite the living nightmare. He admitted that some mail that he
received was thrown away. He had a difficult time paying attention to bills in the mail
when he did receive them (Tr. 20). He does not believe this excuses him, but he was
concerned about the lives of the people around him (Tr. 20). The priority was to survive.
When his wife left, he was distraught and even threw away mail. His accounts became
delinquent.
3
In 2007, Applicant’s wife sold the house she was living in. When Applicant moved
to be with her, they rented an apartment. Applicant found employment when he
relocated to be with his wife, but took a $30,000 pay cut. It was not until 2008, when he
obtained his current employment, that he recovered the reduction in wages. In 2008,
Applicant’s wife required surgery.
The SOR alleges delinquent debts totaling approximately $79,000 (GE 5).
Applicant contacted Consumer Credit Counseling in April 2008, immediately after he
was hired by his current employer. He attended financial counseling and created a
budget. He had already contacted the counseling organization earlier but did not have
the money to implement the payment plan (Tr. 26). He chose this organization because
they do not require an exorbitant up-front fee (Tr. 27). He met with them and arranged a
payment plan to cover his debts. In June 2008, the first funds were automatically
transferred from his checking account (AE C). This agency does not negotiate away
interest and late fees, thus the amount of money owed does not reflect the original
amount of debt that Applicant owed to creditors. Applicant has paid two other debts that
are not listed on the SOR. The debts were for a line of credit from a credit union. He
paid approximately $4,000 (Tr. 28). He also paid $4,500 for federal tax due from tax
year 2005.  
The current status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is as follows: Applicant pays
$1,610 a month through the Consumer Credit Counseling payment plan for accounts
listed in the SOR (AE C). Applicant pays a monthly amount of $315 for the account
listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. The balance is approximately $11,000 down $4,000. The accounts
listed in SOR ¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.m and 1.n are paid in full. Three additional accounts will be
paid in full by the end of December 2009. Applicant will apply the extra money to other
accounts (Tr. 38). Applicant has paid more than half the original delinquent amount
alleged in the SOR. He estimates that he owes $36,000 in delinquent debt.
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $5,943, which includes his
military retirement income (GE 2). He is current with his monthly expenses of $3,425
(AE D). He has no credit cards (Tr. 31). Applicant has a retirement account and saves
an amount of money each month. He does not have a car loan.
Applicant received many decorations and awards during his 21 year career in the
military. His awards and medals include an Air Force Commendation with an Oak Leaf
Cluster, Air Force Achievement Medals, Air Force Good Conduct Medal with four Oak
Leaf Clusters and an Air Force Longevity Service Medal with four Oak Leaf Clusters. He
earned an Air Force Overseas Service Short Tour Ribbon with one Oak Leaf Cluster.
He retired as a Master Sergeant in 1991.
Applicant is described by his supervisor as an outstanding and dedicated
employee (AE E). In 2008, he received an award and Certificate of Appreciation for
outstanding job performance (AE E).
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on many accounts for
several years. He owed approximately $79,000. He did not make any payments in 2005
or 2006. His credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the concern may be
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant had no
difficulty with his finances until Hurricane Katrina devastated the state in summer 2005.
He attempted to help his employees through this horrific time. He did not make
payments on his bills. He stayed in the state to help with the project. His wife left the
state and he had additional expenses. His judgment may have been clouded with the
terrible waste and devastation that occurred. This was not typical behavior for this
career military man. He has addressed the delinquent debts and did not shirk his
responsibility when he was able to concentrate on life in 2007. His lower pay caused
some delay in his payment plan, but he has been consistent with his payments since
April 2008. His judgment and reliability are not at issue at this time. This mitigating
condition applies. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ This mitigating condition
applies in part based on the reasoning above. In addition, his wife was ill and this
caused an additional hardship. 
6
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received financial counseling, and created a budget.
He began his repayment plan and has an organized plan to resolve the remaining
debts. He has paid more than half of the original debt. His efforts are sufficient to carry
his burden in this case. I conclude these mitigating conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military for
21 years and received many awards and decorations. He has worked for defense
contractors for many years. He has held a top secret security clearance since 1988
without any problem. He is rated as outstanding by his employer. He served his
employer during Katrina and remained at the site after the hurricane to help. He had
personal hardship at the time as well. He was very distressed at the overall situation
and tried to handle things as best as he could given the horrible situation.
Applicant obtained counseling and started to repay his creditors prior to the SOR.
He has consistently paid a monthly amount of $1,610 since obtaining his current
position. Several account are already paid in full. He is saving money. He is responsible
and has the ability to pay his debts.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
7
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial
considerations security guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
