                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-01529 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed 15 delinquent debts totaling 
$40,318. In July and August 2009, Applicant paid seven debts totaling $4,533. He 
disputed one debt for $33. His remaining SOR debts totaled $35,752, and all related to 
education loans. He indicated he could have begun a payment plan on his remaining 
SOR debts; however, he chose not to do so. He failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 5). 
On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 28, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated September 29, 2009, was provided 
to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 On November 30, 2009, Applicant provided a 
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted that he previously owed all of 
the SOR debts, except SOR ¶ 1.e ($33) (Item 4). He also provided an explanation for 
his financial problems, and explained that he paid the seven debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($893), 1.b ($931), 1.c ($113), 1.d ($246), 1.f ($86), 1.g ($678), and 1.o ($1,586) (Item 
4). After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 He worked for a 
defense contractor from December 2001 to 2008, and he has been a contract employee 
for over one year working at a military installation (Item 6 at 14; FORM response). He 
has not had access to classified information for the last year; however, he would need 
access to classified information in the event of exceptional circumstances (Item 6 at 14; 
FORM response).  
 
Applicant received a bachelor of science degree in June 2005. He married in 
1996 and divorced in 2005. He remarried in late 2008 (Item 6 at 13-14). His children 
were born in 1997, 1999, and 2001. He has never served in the U.S. military. He has 
never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse circumstances. His file 
does not contain any adverse information relating to police involvement. For example, 
he has never been charged with a felony, any firearms or explosives offense(s), and 
does not have any currently pending charges. He has never been charged with any 
offense related to alcohol or drugs. He has not been arrested for or charged with any 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated October 19, 
2009; and Applicant’s receipt is dated October 27, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
November 21, 2008, security clearance application (Item 5). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
other misdemeanor-level offenses. There is no evidence that he has abused alcohol or 
drugs. In the financial information section of his 2008 security clearance application, he 
listed an April 2008 state tax lien related to delinquent state income taxes, and 
approximately $27,000 in delinquent student loans. Applicant did not list any periods of 
unemployment in the last seven years.     
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed 15 delinquent debts totaling 
$40,318 as follows: ¶ 1.a (state tax—$893); ¶ 1.b (state tax—$931); ¶ 1.c (collection 
account—$113); ¶ 1.d (collection account—$246); ¶ 1.e (collection account—$33); ¶ 1.f 
(collection account—$86); ¶ 1.g (collection account—$678); ¶¶ 1.h to 1.n (education 
debts—$3,492; $6,248; $3,621; $4,635; $7,317; $7,342; $3,079 ); and ¶ 1.o (collection 
account—$1,586) (Item 1).  
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted responsibility for all debts except the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($33) (Item 4 at 2). He checked his credit report, and this debt did not appear 
on it (Item 4 at 2).  
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. In approximately 2006, the federal 
government garnished Applicant’s pay for income taxes owed for the 2004 and 2005 tax 
years (Item 6 at 11, 12). He completed repayment of his delinquent federal income 
taxes in October 2006 (Item 6 at 12). 
 
On December 23, 2008, Applicant explained to an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator that his separation in 2003 from his wife and children 
and divorce in 2005 caused financial problems for him (Item 6 at 11-14). His spouse 
was unemployed and the family debts became his sole responsibility (Item 6 at 11). 
Initially, he had to pay monthly child support of $800 (Item 6 at 11). He also had to pay 
$2,700 for their children’s medical care (Item 6 at 11). His former spouse moved to a 
different state and it was expensive for Applicant to travel to visit his children (Item 6 at 
11). Applicant told the OPM investigator that he did not receive financial counseling.  
 
In May 2009, Applicant received notice of the SOR debts through DOHA 
interrogatories (Item 6). He noted that his wife unexpectedly needed a tonsillectomy in 
the Spring of 2009, and he was unable to immediately address his delinquent debts 
(Item 6 at 4). Medical costs for the tonsillectomy exceeded his insurance by about 
$3,000 (Item 6 at 14). He indicated he planned to pay a medical debt for $109, and the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($86) in May 2009 (Item 6 at 4). 
   
On July 6, 2009, and August 4, 2009, Applicant paid seven SOR debts totaling 
$4,533. On July 6, 2009, he paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($113), 1.d ($246), and 1.f 
($86) (Item 4 at 1, 6, 7, 8). 
 
On August 4, 2009, Applicant paid four state tax liens, including the two tax debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($893) and 1.b ($931) (Item 4 at 1, 4, 5) and two additional non-SOR tax 
liens. His state tax payments totaled $3,203 (Item 4 at 1; SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
state required that he pay all debts with a lump sum (Item 4 at 1). It took him some time 
to save sufficient funds to pay his state tax debts (Item 4 at 1). On August 4, 2009, he 
also paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($678) and 1.o ($1,586) (Item 4 at 2, 9, 10). The 
$1,586 debt resulted from a contract to a dating service (Item 6 at 13).  
 
Applicant made a $1,870 payment towards his delinquent student loans when the 
federal government involuntarily garnished his federal tax refund in 2006 or 2007 (Item 
6 at 5). He said he planned to start paying his student loans through a payroll deduction 
of 15% of his after-tax income regardless of whether his clearance was granted or not 
(Item 4 at 2).4 However, he wanted to wait for the decision on his clearance to start this 
allotment because it would be “silly to have a payment or [two]” deducted from his 
paycheck and then he would become unemployed (Item 4 at 2). If he became 
unemployed, he would be unable to make payments to address his delinquent student 
loans (Item 4 at 2). When he responded to the FORM, he again emphasized that “it 
would be rather silly to” set up an allotment to pay his student loans before he learned 
whether his security clearance would be granted.   
 
Applicant and his spouse’s net monthly pay is about $4,700 (Item 6 at 9). His 
monthly expenses are about $3,500, leaving about $1,200 a month to address his 
student loans (Item 6 at 9, 14). Applicant did not provide any documents showing his 
communications with his student loan creditors concerning his efforts to pay, establish 
payment plans, or otherwise resolve his delinquent student loans.5    
 
An information technology specialist, who works with Applicant, described his 
careful compliance with agency regulations and policies (FORM response). She lauded 
his work ethic and recommended that he receive a security clearance (FORM 
response). 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
4On May 12, 2009, Applicant said as soon as his smaller debts were paid, he would contact the 
holder of his student loans, and authorize a direct payment from his salary of about 15% to address this 
debt (Item 6 at 5).  
 
5The FORM at pages 5-6 notes the lack of documentation showing Applicant’s efforts to resolve 
his delinquent student loans.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, in his OPM 
interview, in his response to DOHA interrogatories, and in his SOR response. In 2006, 
the federal government garnished his pay because he did not pay sufficient federal 
income taxes in 2004 and 2005. His student loans have been delinquent for several 
years. His SOR listed 15 delinquent debts totaling $40,318. Although he paid seven 
SOR debts as well as his delinquent federal income taxes, his financial difficulties 
extended over several years and continue today. The government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether he is fully committed to resolving his delinquent SOR 
debts and is making adequate steps to do so.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by 
separation, divorce, and medical problems that were not fully covered by insurance. 
However, he has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances with respect to his unresolved SOR debts. He had sufficient 
financial resources to begin a payment plan to address his student loans, and chose not 
to do so.6  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant did not receive financial counseling; 
however, he probably has otherwise learned about financial issues. Applicant cannot 
receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because he has not paid, started payment plans, 
disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent student loans. There are some initial, 
positive “indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has 
admitted his responsibility for the SOR debts. He paid seven SOR debts. He promised 
to eventually resolve his student loans. He also established some mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(d) because he showed some good faith7 in the resolution of his SOR debts by 
admitting responsibility for all of his SOR debts except for one small debt, paying seven 
 
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
SOR debts and his delinquent federal income taxes, and promising to resolve his 
student loans.  
 
Applicant consistently denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($33). He 
checked his credit report, and this debt did not appear on it. I conclude this debt is not 
established as his responsibility, and find “For Applicant” in the Formal Findings on 
page 9, infra.   
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent student loans. He resolved seven of his smaller 
delinquent SOR debts and paid his delinquent federal income taxes; however, he did 
not start a payment plan to address his delinquent student loans even though he had 
sufficient financial resources to establish a payment plan. His steps are simply 
inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant deserves substantial credit for volunteering to 
support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense contractor. There is 
no evidence that he has a criminal record or has ever violated security rules. There is 
every indication that he is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, his 
employer, and that he is an honorable person. He does not abuse alcohol or illegal 
drugs. He has never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse 
circumstances. His file does not contain any adverse information relating to police 
involvement. His separation, divorce, and medical problems contributed to his financial 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
woes. He paid his delinquent federal taxes, seven SOR debts, and other non-SOR 
debts. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. He began to have 
financial difficulties several years ago, when multiple debts became delinquent. It was 
necessary for the federal government to garnish his pay to ensure his federal income 
taxes were paid, In May 2009, he responded to DOHA interrogatories, and in August 
2009, he responded to the SOR. He had ample opportunity to contact his student loan 
creditors and to make greater progress in the resolution of his student loan debts. He 
did not pay, start payments, dispute, or otherwise resolve his student loans, which total 
$35,752. He had about $1,200 a month after expenses to address his delinquent 
student loans. He said he could have begun a payment plan to address his delinquent 
student loans several months ago; however, he chose not to do so. He emphasized that 
it would be “silly” for him to begin payments, even though he had the resources to make 
payments, before he learned whether his security clearance would be granted.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant made insufficient progress to resolve his delinquent 
student loans, even though he had steady employment and ample opportunity to 
contact his student loan creditors and provide documentation. He was on clear notice 
from his receipt of DOHA interrogatories and even more so after he received the SOR 
that he needed to show substantial progress in the resolution of his delinquent student 
loans; however, he did not provide documentation showing his efforts to accomplish this 
security responsibility.    
   
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the 
government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h to 1.n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
