 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02906 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on the evidence as a whole, Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the 
government’s security concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. His 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 9, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On August 17, 2009, Applicant answered (AR) the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 30, 
2009, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on October 7, 2009. Applicant received 
the FORM on October 13, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a letter and three exhibits to 
which Department Counsel had no objection. On November 16, 2009, DOHA assigned 
the case to me.  I subsequently marked Applicant’s submission as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through D and admitted them into the record. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Pursuant to Directive E3.1.17, I am amending the SOR so that the allegation in 
Paragraph 1.a conforms to the record evidence. It shall read as follows: “You used 
marijuana, with varying frequency, from about 1978 (high school) to at least September 
2008.”  The date of December 2008 is stricken. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his AR, Applicant denied the sole factual allegation contained in Paragraph 1 
of the SOR pertaining to the time frame that he illegal used marijuana.  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married and has two children from a previous 
marriage. In May 1994, he earned a Master of Science degree in Mechanical 
Engineering. In January 1995, he began working as a project engineer for a federal 
contractor. In December 2008, he submitted an e-QIP. (Item 4.)  
 
 In response to Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity on the e-
QIP, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana from “1/2001 (Estimated) to Present” 
and explained as follows: 
 
In the last 7 years, I have smoked marijuana very occasionally at social 
events where it was passed around. This has occurred maybe 6 – 8 times 
in that period of time. I do not purchase or possess marijuana. No other 
drug use of any kind. My judgement (sic) and trustworthiness has not 
been effected (sic) by this infrequent social use.  
 
In December 2008, Applicant “made a clear and conscious decision that [he] 
would not smoke marijuana again because it is illegal and [he] wanted to hold a position 
of more responsibility at work, and smoking marijuana was in direct conflict with that 
goal.” (AE A.)  
 
 On March 6, 2009, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about 
answers in his e-QIP. Applicant admitted that he started illegally smoking marijuana in 
high school and used it frequently. His use decreased when he entered college to once 
or twice a semester. After graduating, he sporadically smoked marijuana once or twice 
 
3 
 
 
in some years, and not at all in other years. (Item 5 at 3.) The last time he used 
marijuana was in September 2008 while he was on a camping trip with some friends. 
Previous to that time, he used it in June 2008. He never purchased marijuana, but used 
it when it was offered to him in social settings. (Id. at 4.) He no longer associates with 
the individual who gave him the marijuana during the September 2008 camping trip. (AE 
A.) Both his wife and security officer are aware of his illegal drug abuse. (Item 5 at 4.) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant asserted that he has “lived a drug free 
lifestyle for the last 13 months as an example of [his] commitment to abstinence and 
change in behavior.” (AE A.) He signed a statement of his intention never to use it again 
and understands that if he does use it in the future it would mean an automatic 
revocation of his security clearance. (AE B.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor submitted a recommendation that he be granted a security 
clearance. The supervisor wrote that Applicant has “received exemplary performance 
reviews every year while being entrusted to carry out some very challenging US DoD 
projects.” (AE D; C.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
 
4 
 
 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 (a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
Based on Applicant’s admissions that he illegally used marijuana for most of his 
adult life up to September 2008, the government raised a potential disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 25(a). 
After the government has raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 26 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising 
from illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of         
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
6 
 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply because Applicant regularly used illegal drugs over 
the course of his adult life up to September 2008. Given his long history of illegal 
marijuana use, including while he was employed with a federal contractor, his behavior 
casts doubt on his current trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant stated that he 
does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future and that he signed a statement of intent 
with an automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation. He asserted that he no 
longer associates with one of his friends who smokes marijuana. Those claims, albeit 
unsubstantiated, warrant a very limited application of AG ¶¶ 25(b) (1) and (4). 
Applicant’s uncorroborated assertions that he has not used marijuana for 13 months 
does not trigger the application of AG ¶ 25(b) (3) because said abstinence is insufficient 
evidence to establish an appropriate period of abstinence, in view of his thirty years of 
sporadic use. No evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 25(c).  The record does not 
contain evidence that Applicant has participated in a substance abuse treatment, which 
is necessary to warrant the application of AG ¶ 25(d).  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 41-year-old married 
man, who has illegally used marijuana most of his adult life, beginning in 1978 until 
September 2008, when he realized that his drug usage could effect his employment.1 
                                                          
1Apparently, Applicant was either unaware of federal employment prohibitions against illegal drug 
use or chose to ignore them since he became employed in 1995. 
 
7 
 
 
While his candid admissions of the illegal drug use throughout the security clearance 
process are noteworthy, his assertion that he has no intention to illegally use marijuana 
in the future is not persuasive. Other than his personal assurances, he did not provide 
any independent evidence to corroborate his assertions that he has not used it since 
September 2008, or that he has gained significant insight or personal skills that will 
prevent future illegal behavior. His long history of use, albeit sporadic but while 
employed with a federal contractor, raises concerns about his reliability, judgment, and 
ability to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
