 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-02344 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on January 6, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were 
 
1
 
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On August 27, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer to the SOR on 
September 9, 2009, in which he admitted all allegations under Guideline H and Guideline 
E. In his Answer, Applicant also requested a decision without a hearing. DOHA 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM), dated October 20, 
2009, which included six documents (Items 1-6) offered in support of the government’s 
case. Applicant received the FORM on November 2, 2009, and was given 30 days to file 
a response. His response, dated November 17, 2009, included four exhibits (Items A–D). 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant's documents. The case was assigned to 
me on December 16, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are accepted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, 
and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 32 years old, earned a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He is single, but as 
of January 2009, was in a committed relationship. He does not have children. Applicant 
has worked for a defense contractor since 2008 (Item 4). 
 
Applicant used marijuana from February 2000 to February 2009. At the time he 
used marijuana, Applicant was 22 to 31 years old. He stated in his Answer to the SOR 
that his use was casual and infrequent. In his security clearance application, he 
disclosed that he used it 100 times between February 2000 and April 2008. However, 
during his security interview,3 he revised this estimate to approximately 600 times 
between February 2000 and February 2008. He then admitted that he used it about four 
more times, with the last use occurring in early February 2009 (Item 5). He usually 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the 
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Applicant attested to the accuracy of the security interview report in an interrogatory response signed 
and notarized on May 8, 2009 (Item 6). 
 
2
 
smoked marijuana with friends on weekends. He did not sell marijuana, but sometimes 
provided it to his friends. He stated to the interviewer that he is not addicted to 
marijuana; however, he admitted that he returned to using it after believing that he had 
ended his use in April 2008. He also stated that if his job or security clearance depended 
on ending his marijuana use, he would do so. His last use in February 2009 occurred 
after he was granted a security clearance on January 12, 2009. He notes in his response 
to the FORM, however, that he was unaware that he had been granted his security 
clearance until February 18, 2009, after his last use had occurred (Item 5; Item B).  
 
Applicant also said during his interview that he hoped to stop using marijuana, but 
might use it again if the opportunity arose in the future. He expanded on this statement in 
his Answer to the SOR, and clarified that he had no intention of using it in the future, 
because he now grasps the significance of drug use in relation to holding a security 
clearance. He reiterated that he would not use marijuana if it would cause him to lose his 
job or his security clearance (Item 3).  
 
 When Applicant completed his security clearance application on January 6, 2009, 
he answered question 24 concerning drug use, by stating that he used marijuana 100 
times between February 2000 and April 2008, when he actually used it 600 times, and 
his use extended to at least January 2009. The government alleges in SOR allegation 
2.a., that Applicant deliberately falsified this answer. He admits the facts stated in the 
allegation, but claims that he did not pay sufficient attention to the questions, and had no 
intent to deceive the government (Items 3, 4; Item B).  
 
Applicant's Response to the FORM contained four exhibits, including several 
character letters. A letter from his company president, a former U.S. Navy commanding 
officer, indicates that Applicant is a highly talented employee who can be depended upon 
to solve whatever problem arises. He strongly recommends that a security clearance be 
granted to Applicant. His supervisor commends Applicant's maturity, leadership ability, 
and integrity. A co-worker who travels on international missions with Applicant praises 
his dedication and trustworthiness. An operations director noted that Applicant has 
demonstrated strong character and integrity, and can be trusted with high-cost 
equipment and sensitive intellectual property, including while traveling abroad (Item D). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary 
decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate 
the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an 
applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The facts raise two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG 
¶25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance). Applicant admits 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4
 
 
5
using marijuana over a period of nine years. He was granted his security clearance in 
January 2009, and admits that he used marijuana after receiving it. Both conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline H also includes two relevant mitigating conditions. The first, AG ¶26(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), cannot be applied. Applicant’s last 
use of marijuana was in February 2009, less than one year ago, which is recent. His 
use of illegal drugs did not occur under unique circumstances, but with friends on 
weekends. His repeated use indicates a long-standing willingness to ignore the rule of 
law, and raises doubts about his trustworthiness and good judgment. Moreover, 
Applicant used an illegal drug after submitting an application for a security clearance. 
He claims that he was unaware that he had received the clearance at the time that he 
last used marijuana. However, he had submitted a security clearance application, and 
knew or should have known that he had accepted the obligations imposed on those who 
hold security clearances. His conduct raises doubts about his good judgment and 
reliability and his ability to follow rules and regulations. AG ¶26(a) does not apply.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b) is also relevant: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
There is no record evidence to support AG ¶26(b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(4). As to AG 
¶26(b)(3), Applicant has abstained from marijuana use since mid-February 2009. A 
period of 10 months is an insufficient period of abstinence on which to base an intent to 
end marijuana use, especially when compared to nine years of use. It is also significant 
that Applicant told the security investigator that he might use marijuana in the future if 
the opportunity arose. His statement raises doubts as to his commitment to avoid 
marijuana. Although in later statements he said that he intends to end his marijuana 
use, his intent appears to be more related to the effect of marijuana use on his security 
clearance eligibility than to a commitment to avoid engaging in illegal activity. AG ¶26(b) 
does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified information provided 
to the government on his security clearance application, implicating AG ¶16(a). 
Application of this disqualifying condition requires intent to deliberately falsify 
information. Applicant’s failure to list the full extent of his marijuana use was not 
intentional. His disclosure of 100 uses of marijuana over a period of eight years shows 
that he did not intend to hide relevant information from the government. His disclosure 
put the government on notice that drug use was an issue that required further 
investigation, and it was explored in a security Interview five weeks after he submitted 
his application. I conclude that Applicant did not intend to hide his drug use from the 
government. Disqualifying condition AG ¶16(a) does not apply and mitigation is not 
required. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
7
 
 Applicant decided to engage in criminal conduct by using illegal drugs hundreds 
of times over the years between 2000 and 2009. His last use was less than one year 
ago, when he was a mature adult 31 years of age. Applicant's recent abstinence is 
insufficient to overcome his history of drug use. Moreover, Applicant’s most recent 
illegal drug use occurred while he held a security clearance. He claims he did not know 
the security clearance had actually been granted at the time he last used marijuana. 
However, Applicant decided to use an illegal drug after completing his application; his 
actions indicate that he did not accept the obligations he assumed when he requested 
that he be granted a security clearance.  
 
 It is troubling that Applicant returned to marijuana use after thinking he had 
successfully ended his drug use in 2008. Even more troubling is Applicant’s statement 
that he might use marijuana in the future. Although his candor is commendable, such a 
lack of commitment cannot be condoned, as it indicates willingness to engage in illegal 
conduct. It appears Applicant ended his current marijuana use only because it 
jeopardized his security clearance eligibility, not because it involved illegal conduct. 
Taken together, Applicant's actions raise doubts as to his trustworthiness, reliability, 
and good judgment. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.d.   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
