  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04380 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has six unpaid state and federal tax liens totaling in excess of 
$260,000. He asserts his federal tax obligation is approximately $175,000. He has 
made no payments or arrangements to make payments on the tax liens. Applicant has 
failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
1 
 
 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 5, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
  
 On August 20, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
December 3, 2009, I was assigned the case. On December 4, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on December 9, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through D, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On December 10, 2009, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material; it was admitted into the record as 
Ex. E. On December 15, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 At the hearing, Government Counsel asked to be allowed to make two 
amendments to the SOR. Applicant did not oppose the motion and the changes were 
made. Change one related to the amount of delinquent child support listed in SOR ¶ 
1.h. The SOR reads $24,730 and the government asserted the true amount was 
$2,473. (Tr. 22) The change was made.  
 
In April 2009, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). The SOR asserted that in response to question 28, 
he failed to indicate he had been more than 180 days delinquent on his debts. Applicant 
had actually answered “yes” to that question. (Tr. 23) Government moved that the 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a be changed to conform to the evidence. The motion requested 
the following words be deleted, “a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?; [and] b.” And in the next sentence “both of those” be 
changed to “this” and “questions” be changed from plural to singular form. 
 
In pertinent part, the allegation now reads “. . . in response to Section 28. Your 
Financial Delinquencies: Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
You answered “No” to this question; whereas in truth, you deliberately failed to disclose 
that you were delinquent on the accounts set forth in paragraph 1, above.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits he was two months behind on the 
credit card account listed in SOR ¶ 1.g ($407). He also admitted that at one time he 
may have been $2,400 behind in his child support obligation. He denied the remaining 
allegations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
 
 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old electronics installer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
Applicant served honorably for nine years in the U.S. Marine Corps, leaving in February 
1988 at the rank of E-5. (Tr. 74) 
 
 From September 1995 through September 2005, Applicant was an owner-
operator trucker working for various over-the-road trucking firms. In September 2005, 
Applicant went to Iraq to work as a truck driver for a defense contractor. In September 
2009, he obtained his current job as an electronics installer working overseas, making 
$180,000 per year. (Tr. 61, 73) 
 
 From at least August 1995 until late August 2005, Applicant lived in Louisiana. 
On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck. Applicant was working in Iraq, but his 
family was living in New Orleans. His home suffered from 13 feet of flood water. He 
incurred $27,000 in hotel expenses for his family. Applicant’s family relocated to Texas 
until they returned to New Orleans in May 2008. Not only his immediately family, but 
also his extended family was displaced. At the new location, Applicant supported 17 
family members and paid $150 per hotel room to rent six rooms per day for 30 days. 
(Tr. 62) Applicant and his family currently live in an apartment. He has been by his old 
home, at which time he found mail addressed to him at that address lying on the 
ground. He is trying to rebuild his home, but his income prevents him from receiving 
government assistance. (Tr. 63)  
 
 Applicant was two months behind on the military credit card (SOR ¶ 1.g, $407). 
Applicant asserts he has paid this debt. The CBRs reflect the account was transferred 
or sold and had a zero balance. (Ex. 2, 4) Following the hearing, Applicant presented a 
CBR dated December 8, 2009, which indicates the account was sold or transferred. (Ex. 
E) 
 
 Applicant incurred a child support obligation for a son born in November 1987. 
(Ex. 1) At some point, Applicant’s child support was increased from $400 per month to 
$955 per month. (Tr. 42) He made his payment by payroll deduction. (Ex. 2, Tr. 56) 
Applicant admits he was, at one time, behind on his support obligations. He stated he 
may have been $2,400 (SOR ¶ 1.h) in arrears. (Ex. 3) In June 2009, Applicant’s child 
support obligation terminated and he made his last payment. (Ex. D) His CBRs reflect a 
zero balance on this account. (Ex. 2, 4) 
 
 From June 1998 to March 2001, Applicant worked for a trucking firm. In April 
2000, he leased 1997 Freightliner truck through a “lease operator program” where the 
company would finance the truck and he would repay the company. (Tr. 42, 54, 69) 
Applicant did not own the truck. (Tr. 68) In March 2001, the trucking firm went bankrupt 
and was liquidated. The trucking company called Applicant and told him he needed to 
surrender the truck to the lending institution. At the time, Applicant was on the road and 
arranged to leave the truck at a truck stop. (Tr. 54) As of February 2003, Applicant owes 
the lender $21,332 (SOR ¶ 1.f) for what is listed on his CBR as a repossession. (Ex. 3) 
Applicant believed he owed nothing further once he surrendered the truck.  
3 
 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s June 2009 CBR and December 2007 CBR list this debt as a “closed 
or paid” account with a zero balance. (Tr. 2, 4) Following the hearing, Applicant 
submitted a single page from his credit report related to this obligation. (Ex. E) The 
Equifax report lists the account as paid as agreed with a zero balance. The Transunion 
report lists the account as a $21,332 repossession. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation from the creditor as to the status of this account.  
 
 Applicant did not file tax returns for year 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001.2 (Tr. 51, 
100) Applicant also stated he failed to file his 1997 taxes. (Tr. 43, 49) When Applicant’s 
child support obligation doubled, Applicant believed he had to choose between paying 
his child support and paying his taxes. Applicant chose to make his child support 
payments. (Ex. 1) In October 1997, the state filed a $3,386 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
against Applicant. (Ex. 6) The filing date of the lien is known, however the year of the 
tax return for the amount owed is unknown. The court number, case number, address of 
the court, and the court’s telephone number for this tax lien appears in his November 
2008 credit bureau report (CBR). (Ex. 3, Tr. 76) He became aware of this obligation in 
December 2008. (Tr. 44) He has not paid this lien because he has yet to file his federal 
return for the year in question. Without completing his federal return he cannot complete 
his state return. He has not contacted the state concerning this debt.  
 
 In September 2006, the state filed a $1,810 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b) against 
Applicant. (Ex. 6) In his August 2009 answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he did not 
know about this debt, but would investigate it. The court number, case number, address 
of the court, and the court’s telephone number for this tax lien appear in his November 
2008 CBR. (Ex. 3) The tax lien has not been paid. 
 
 On August 2005, two weeks before Hurricane Katrina struck, the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) filed a $238,763 federal tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.c) against Applicant’s 
property. (Ex. 6) In July 2007, Applicant paid $2,500 to an individual Applicant asserts is 
an accountant who was to assist him in the filing of his taxes. (Tr. 45, Ex. E) Applicant 
contacts this individual every two or three months. (Tr. 83) Applicant failed to show 
what, if anything, this individual as done related to the filing of Applicant’s past due tax 
returns. There is no evidence any tax returns have been filed by the accountant and the 
federal tax liens have not been paid. Applicant did not know which tax years the tax 
liens represented. Following the hearing, Applicant asserted he had made an 
appointment to see a CPA. (Ex. E) 
 In April 2007, two additional federal tax liens of $5,881 (SOR ¶ 1.d) and $18,571 
(SOR ¶ 1.e) were filed. (Ex. 3, 6) Applicant asserts that once he files tax returns for the 
years in question, the amount of taxes owed will be less than that claimed by the IRS.  
 Applicant provided a copy of his IRS Form 1040 (Ex. A) for tax year 2006. 
Applicant’s wages that year were $110,000 and he claimed $82,400 for foreign earned 
                                                          
2 These taxes would not be barred by any statute of limitation for the statute of limitation starts to run for 
taxes on the date the returns were filed. Since the returns have yet to be filed, the statute has not 
commenced to run.  
4 
 
 
 
 
income. A copy of the IRS Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, was not attached to his 
return. Applicant owed $3,502 in federal tax and the IRS stated it would not charge 
additional penalty or interest if this amount was paid by September 3, 2007. A copy of a 
check in that amount is part of Ex. A. The return is not signed or dated by Applicant, his 
spouse, or the tax preparer. Applicant’s wife and child were living in Texas during the 
tax year and there was no state tax return filed because Texas has no state income tax. 
 Applicant provided a copy of his electronically filed federal tax return for 2007. 
(Ex. B) It was signed by the tax preparer on April 14, 2008. Applicant’s income was 
$156,600 with an $85,700 deduction claimed for foreign earned income. No IRS Form 
2555 was provided. Applicant had $23,300 in federal tax withheld from his wages and 
he claimed an $11,533 refund. There is no evidence Applicant ever received a refund in 
this amount from the IRS. 
 Applicant provided a copy of his federal tax return for 2008. (Ex. C) The copy 
provided was not signed by the tax preparer. Applicant’s and his spouse’s signature 
were not on the return because a Form 8879 was filed. Applicant’s income was $59,500 
and a $59,500 deduction was claimed for foreign earned income. No IRS Form 2555 
was provided. Applicant had to include an approximately $11,000 payment of his IRA or 
pension. Applicant had a break in service from his contractor job and was paid his 
accrued retirement funds. (Tr. 61) Applicant had approximately $15,000 in federal tax 
withheld from his wages and he claimed a refund of approximately $14,000. There is no 
evidence Applicant ever received a refund from the IRS. 
 Applicant states his family returned to Louisiana in May 2008. However, his 
federal return (Ex. C) lists a Louisiana address. If he were living in Louisiana he would 
have been required to file a state income tax return. The receipt, from the tax preparer 
(Ex. C), indicates Applicant was charged for the preparation of a state return, however, 
Applicant submitted no state return.  
 In April 2009, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Ex. 1) Applicant answered “no”, which asked if he 
had any tax liens. However, he did list that he owed past due taxes. He answered “yes”, 
which asked if he had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts, but answered 
“no”, which asked if he was currently 90 days delinquent on any debts. He also 
indicated he had been delinquent on court-imposed child support in response to 
question. On his e-QIP, he further explained his problems he had in making his child 
support payments. Applicant states he answered “no” when asked about being 90 days 
delinquent because he had already stated he was 180 days delinquent and thought his 
answer was sufficient to cover the 90 day question. (Tr. 59) He asserts he was not 
being evasive or trying to be deceptive.  
 Following the hearing, Applicant submitted a form (Ex. E) asking that the federal 
tax lien be withdrawn because the notice was filed prematurely, or not in accordance 
with IRS procedure. Applicant did not explain why the notice was premature; the tax lien 
had been filed in a court of law.  
5 
 
 
 
 
 Applicant sent a letter (Ex. E) to an unidentified party disputing three tax liens on 
his credit report. He asserts the federal tax lien is $174,606 and not $238,763 as listed 
on his CBR. He also asserts, but failed to provide documentation, that two additional tax 
liens in the amounts of $18,571 and $5,581 are included in the $174,606 amount. 
Applicant asserts this was based on information he obtained by contacting the IRS. 
However, he provided no documentation from the IRS supporting his assertions.  
 Applicant filed an IRS form (Ex. E) requesting a transcript of tax returns for tax 
years 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001. Since Applicant filed no tax returns for these years, 
it is uncertain what he hopes to receive from the IRS. He may wish to discover how the 
IRS figured his taxes when the IRS completed the returns when no returns were 
received from Applicant.  
 On December 8, 2009, Applicant made a request to the state for a tax 
assessment and lien pay-off. (Ex. E) The amounts of the two tax liens are $3,386 and 
$1,810. Applicant failed to provide any documentation establishing any amounts have 
been paid to the state taxing authority. Applicant asserts that once the state informs him 
what is owed, he will pay it. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
6 
 
 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years 1998 through 
7 
 
 
 
 
2001. Applicant has two unpaid state tax liens totaling approximately $5,000 and three 
unpaid IRS tax liens totaling approximately $263,000. Applicant’s history of delinquent 
debt is documented in his credit reports, state and federal judgments, and lien filings. 
(Ex. 6) Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” 
AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to 
file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing 
of the same,” apply.  
   
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant asserts his federal tax lien is $174,606, but will be reduced once he 
actually files his returns.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were compounded by his child 
support obligations, which increased from $400 per month to $950 per month. He made 
the decision to stop paying his taxes so he could continue making his child support 
payments. He no longer has a child support obligation. It is unlikely he will again incur 
financial problems due to making child support payments. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. 
However, Applicant did not explain why an additional $550 per month child support 
obligation prohibited him from making any tax payments. 
 
While Applicant was working overseas, his family was struck by Hurricane 
Katrina. Applicant and his family incurred unexpected expenses. Applicant attributed 
8 
 
 
 
 
some of his financial problems to having to pay $27,000 for his family to stay in a hotel 
in a different city for one month following the hurricane. (Tr. 98) Applicant asserts he 
was the only family member with a job at the time. He does not explain what his family 
members did with the assistance they received from federal and from other means to 
assist them with housing and other expenses. It is clear that Applicant’s financial 
problems were far more extensive than could be attributed solely to the hotel bill. AG & 
20(b) has limited applicability. 
 
The $238,763, IRS tax lien was filed two weeks before Hurricane Katrina struck. 
Consequently, Applicant’s testimony implying that the storm disrupted the mail and 
caused him not to receive notice of the tax lien has no probative value.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There is no indication Applicant has received 
financial counseling. A year ago, he was questioned about his tax liens. He hired an 
accountant in 2007 and made an appointment with another accountant, but this fails to 
establish his financial problems are being resolved.  
 
Applicant had leased a truck and later surrendered it to the creditor. He asserts 
he owes nothing on this debt. In support of his assertion, he provided a page from his 
CBR with one reporting company listing the truck debt as having a zero balance and 
another reporting company listing the debt as a $31,322 repossession. No 
documentation from the creditor as to the status of this account was presented.  
 
Applicant asserts he paid his military credit card. In support of his assertion he 
presented a page from his December 8, 2009 CBR (Ex. E), which shows the account 
was sold or transferred. The CBR does not indicate this debt was paid. Applicant failed 
to provide any documentation showing this account has been paid.  
 
AG & 20(d) applies only to his child support obligation, which he has paid. It does 
not apply to his remaining debts. For AG¶ 20 (d) to apply to the remaining debts there 
must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and evidence of a good-
faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling his debts is needed, 
which is not present here. He has paid none of the debts. In 2007, he hired an 
accountant to assist him in filing his taxes. Following the hearing he made an 
appointment to see a CPA. Stating he will pay his state taxes is merely an expressed 
hope by Applicant.  
 
Applicant’s state and federal past due tax obligation have not been paid. Those 
large obligations raises concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
9 
 
 
 
 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government has shown Applicant's answer to question 28 on his e-QIP was 
incorrect, but this does not prove Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information 
about his finances. Applicant did list some adverse financial information in response to 
the questions. Specifically, he listed he had tax liens and, at one time, past due child 
support obligations. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact 
in any written document or oral statement to the government, when applying for a 
security clearance, is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a 
falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully.  
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he stated he was more than 180 days 
delinquent on his debts and thought that because he had acknowledged he was 180 
days delinquent the government would have known he was also 90 days delinquent. 
Applicant’s answer was inaccurate, but was not a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification. I find for Applicant as to the personal conduct security concern. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. As of April 1999, Applicant was 
aware his taxes for tax year 1998 were due. Additionally, as he failed to file additional 
returns, he knew he had not paid his taxes for tax years 1999 through 2001. In 2007, 
Applicant hired an accountant to help him file his returns. Following the hearing, he 
made an appointment with a CPA to help him file his taxes.  
10 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
In December 2008, he was questioned about his taxes. In August 2009, 
Applicant received the SOR expressing the government concerns over his unpaid taxes 
and other outstanding obligations, which are sizable. Even though Applicant has known 
for more than a year of the government’s concern about his unpaid taxes and other 
delinquent debts, except for his child support obligation, he has yet to pay any of past 
due debts. He owes more than $170,000 in past due taxes, a debt which continues to 
accumulate interest. Applicant has done too little to pay his past due obligations. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant     
  
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
