 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01741 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 30, 2007, 
and she re-signed the SF-86 on August 28, 2009. On July 16, 2009, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 5, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 31, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for October 7, 2009, was issued 
September 9, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 7 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and called no witnesses. She introduced six exhibits, which were 
identified and marked as Ex. A through Ex. F and admitted to the record without 
objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
October 20, 2009, so that Applicant could, if she wished, provide additional information 
for the record. Applicant timely filed 13 additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. I marked the post-hearing submissions 
as Applicant’s Ex. G through Ex. S, and they were admitted to the record. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 15, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant admitted the two allegations and offered additional 
information. She denied that the allegations raised security concerns under AG F. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and employed as a project manager by a government 
contractor. She is married and the mother of an infant daughter. In 1992, she was 
awarded an associate of applied science degree in electronic technologies. She has 
held a security clearance since 2002. Applicant’s husband is a federal employee and 
also holds a security clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 53-58.) 
 
 In addition to her work as a project manager, Applicant also owns a part-time 
business which installs home security alarms and other electronic equipment in private 
homes. She has owned the business since 2003. She carries out all work by herself, 
with some help from her husband and her cousin. She estimated that in 2006, 2007, 
and 2008, she earned about $5,000 to $7,000 a year from her business. (Ex. 1; Tr. 59-
60.)  
 
 Between 1999 and 2001, Applicant was employed as a field service engineer in a 
southern state. She was single and had no children. She decided to invest some of her 
income in rental properties in order to save money on her taxes. She bought three 
rental properties and successfully managed them. When she moved to take a job in 
another state, she sold the three properties quickly and without difficulty. (Tr. 98-99.) 
 
 Applicant’s skills and abilities enabled her to advance in her profession. She took 
a position in a large metropolitan area, and, in 2003, she purchased a home secured by 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
a mortgage for $344,000. Her monthly mortgage payment was $2,100. In addition, she 
acquired a home equity loan for $11,500 from a credit union. The home is the property 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant lived in the property until she married in September 
2007 and moved into a home owned by her husband. She provided her local taxing 
authority with documents showing the property was no longer her personal residence 
and was being used as an investment property. After her marriage, she continued to 
pay her mortgage on the property but sought a tenant. (SOR; Ex. 1; Ex. F; Ex. P; Tr. 75-
78, 93-94, 100.)  
 
 In 2006, Applicant purchased a second home, which she intended to rent as an 
investment property. She took out two mortgage loans to purchase the property. The 
mortgage payment on the second property was $2,800 a month. Soon after acquiring 
the property, Applicant found a tenant, who paid $2,200 in monthly rent. Applicant’s 
investment property is identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. (SOR; Tr. 82-83.) 
 
 In September 2006, Applicant took a job as a technical security specialist with a 
federal contractor. Her annual income from her job as a federal contractor was 
approximately $76,000 a year.1 Her employer asked her to identify and recommend 
additional employees to carry out the company’s contract work overseas. On December 
21, 2007, as Applicant went to discuss her proposed new hires with management, she 
had good reason to think that her job was secure. However, at the meeting, there was 
no discussion of Applicant’s recommendations. Instead, she was handed a letter telling 
her that her position as Senior Technical Survey Specialist had been eliminated in a 
headquarters reduction in force, effective immediately. She was advised that she would 
receive three weeks of severance pay. This management action came without warning 
and was a complete surprise to Applicant. (Ex. 1; Ex. A; Tr. 49, 60-65.) 
 
 When she lost her job, Applicant had not yet found a tenant for the property that 
had been her personal residence. Then, the tenant in her rental property lost her job in 
January 2008. She continued to reside on the property until August 2008, but did not 
pay rent after she lost her job. Applicant wrote to the tenant and requested that she pay 
her rent. The tenant responded by asking for more time. (Tr. 83-85.) 
 
 Applicant found a tenant to rent her personal residence in March 2008. The 
tenant paid rent for the month of March 2008, and then paid nothing else. Applicant paid 
a $3,000 electric bill that the tenant refused to pay. The tenant did not vacate the 
property until September 2008. (Tr. 79-81.) 
 
 Applicant took preliminary action to evict one of her tenants, but she did not 
follow through with eviction proceedings. She explained that she obtained the legal 
papers necessary to bring an action and then spent some time observing proceedings 
in landlord-tenant court. She observed that even when the judge found for the landlord, 
collection of the debt was the responsibility of the landlord and was not assured. She 
concluded that pursuing legal action against her two delinquent tenants would be costly 
 
1 In addition, she earned $5,000 to $7,000 annually from her own part-time business. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
and was not practical in her situation. Instead, she focused her efforts on trying to sell 
the two properties. (Tr. 81, 84-85.) 
 
 When she lost her job in December 2007, Applicant had approximately $8,500 in 
her 401(K) plan and approximately $2,500 in her savings account. She used her 
severance pay and drew money from her 401(K) and savings accounts to pay her two 
mortgages, which together totaled approximately $5,000 a month. She also used tax 
refunds and drew money from her 401 (K) plan to make renovations and repairs to both 
properties in order to improve their marketability. Applicant was able to pay her two 
mortgages in January and February 2008. She lacked sufficient funds to make the two 
mortgage payments in March 2008 and thereafter. (Tr. 86-90.) 
 
 Applicant contacted her mortgage lenders and notified them of her job loss and 
inability to pay her mortgages. She learned from them and other lenders she consulted 
that she was not eligible for federal assistance because both properties were used for 
investment and neither was used as her primary residence. Additionally, she learned 
that to refinance an investment property, a borrower was required to put 20% down. 
She concluded that she did not have enough money to refinance the properties. (Tr. 99-
100.)    
 
 After losing her job in December 2007, Applicant obtained part-time intermittent 
contract work at $13 an hour in February 2008, and, in 2008, she earned $22,000 from 
this work. Additionally, In July and August 2008, she was hired by a company for a 
temporary job that lasted three weeks. In September 2008, Applicant acquired her 
present full-time position, with a yearly salary of $85,000.2 (Tr. 55-59, 134.)    
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant was indebted to a mortgage lender in 
the approximate amount of $344,000. SOR ¶ 1.b. also alleged that the mortgage debt 
was 120 days past due as of June 11, 2009, and that Applicant owed the lender 
approximately $35,981, which had not been paid. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
 At her hearing, and in post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided credible 
testimony and documentation to establish that, despite her efforts to arrange a short 
sale, the property had been foreclosed upon on May 22, 2009, the sale was ratified by 
the circuit court on June 6, 2009, the ratification order was signed on September 18, 
2009, and she did not owe a balance or remainder on the loan. (Ex. E; Ex. Q; Tr. 91-
93.) 
 
 Applicant also provided documentation to corroborate her statement that she had 
contacted the creditor from whom she had obtained the $11,500 home equity loan when 
she purchased the property identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant also provided 
 
2 At the time of her hearing, Applicant had been on unpaid maternity leave since July 31, 2009, because 
of complications in her pregnancy. She was planning to return to her full-time job on November 2, 2009.  
Between August and November 2009, she received payments from private disability insurance of 
approximately $5,800 every 42 days. In addition to her disability pay, she also received a net payment of 
$2,100 each month from her part-time contract work. (Ex. I; Tr. 118-121.) 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
documentation that established she had a payment plan in place on the home equity 
loan debt, was current on her payments, and owed a balance of $5,030. (Ex. F; Ex. P; 
Tr. 37, 93-97.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant was indebted to a mortgage lender in 
the approximate amount of $222,000, and, as of June 11, 2009, the debt was over 120 
days past due and Applicant owed the lender approximately $29,488, which had not 
been paid. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
 At her hearing, Applicant reported that the lender had delayed foreclosure of the 
property in order to permit her to execute a short sale, which was pending. The short 
sale offer was $162,000, and the deadline for completing the short sale was October 13, 
2009. If the short sale was completed, Applicant would owe nothing further on the debt.  
In a post-hearing submission, dated October 19, 2009, Applicant reported that the short 
sale had failed because the seller had refused the offer and opted out of the contract. 
(Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. G; Tr. 68-73.)  
 
 At her hearing, Applicant discussed her income and monthly budget. In a post-
hearing submission, she provided a personal financial statement, based upon her 
disability and part-time income during her pregnancy, which included her monthly 
expenses and payment of debts. She reported a net monthly income of $5,393, total 
monthly expenses of $3,658, and monthly payments on seven debts of $1,440.  She 
reported a net remainder each month of $295, savings of $1,000, 401(K) assets of 
$4,900, and a vehicle valued at $7,500. (Ex. H; Tr. 101-110.) 
 
 Applicant reported that her husband’s annual salary was approximately $92,000 
and her annual salary from her employer was $85,000. Applicant also provided a 
monthly household financial statement that included her husband’s income and her 
regular income as well as their joint household expenses. The couple’s net household 
monthly income was $10,243.3 Their total joint monthly living expenses totaled $9,764. 
These expenses included Applicant’s car payment of $600 each month and $1,465 in 
credit card payments. Their monthly net remainder was $480. (Ex. H; Ex. R; Tr. 134.) 
 
 When credit card interest rates were about to be increased, Applicant closed four 
of her accounts in order to freeze the interest charged on the accounts. She is not 
delinquent on these accounts, and she is making regular payments on them. She is also 
paying regularly each month on the home equity loan associated with the mortgage 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. She makes regular monthly payments on a time share purchase 
with a balance of $9,320. The two mortgage delinquencies alleged on the SOR are her 
only delinquent debts. ( Ex. J; Ex. K; Ex. L; Ex. M; Ex. N; Ex. O; Ex. P; Tr. 16-17, 47-
48.)  
 
 
 
 
3 Applicant’s husband paid the monthly mortgage of $2,865 on their home. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent mortgage debt on two 
investment properties and was unable to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
 
8 
 
 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted financial delinquencies related to mortgage loans on 
properties she purchased in 2003 and 2006. The delinquencies occurred after she was 
laid off, without notice, from her job in December 2007. Soon thereafter, a tenant in one 
of her rental properties lost her job and was unable to pay her monthly rent to Applicant. 
The tenant in her second rental property moved in, paid only one month’s rent, and 
refused to vacate the premises for six months. Applicant, who was herself unemployed, 
exhausted her savings in an attempt to pay the mortgages, but she was able to do so 
for only two months, until February 2008. She contacted the mortgage lenders and tried 
to work out plans to renegotiate her mortgages. However, because they were 
investment properties, assistance plans for home mortgages were unavailable to her. 
She persevered, upgraded the properties, and tried to sell them. When the mortgage 
lenders threatened foreclosure, she sought to negotiate short sales. Her efforts were not 
successful. Eventually, one property was foreclosed upon, and a proposed short sale on 
the second property fell through. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. She is resourceful and entrepreneurial. She 
established her own part-time business to add to her income, and while she was 
unemployed, she sought out part-time contract work when full-time work was not 
available to her. 
 
 When Applicant lived in another community, she successfully invested in real 
estate, owed three properties, and was able to sell them without difficulty when she 
moved to another location after accepting a new job. She attempted to repeat her 
success in another region of the country but was caught in a severe downturn in the real 
estate market and, unfortunately, rented her properties to irresponsible tenants who did 
not pay their rent. She has learned, through experience, some hard financial lessons. 
She has also acknowledged her financial responsibilities and has made good-faith 
efforts to satisfy her creditors. Her financial record reflects reasonable risk-taking and 
responsible financial behavior. She continues to try to resolve her financial obligations 
and to avoid repeating the same mistakes in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
not relevant in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant possesses skills and 
abilities that have been valued by her employers. She has held a security clearance, 
without incident, since 2002. She is resourceful and has been successful in the 
sometimes uncertain world of government contractors. She purchased two houses as 
investment properties and took on two monthly mortgage payments that totaled 
approximately $5,000 each month. Her financial problems began when she was 
summarily laid off, without notice and without cause, by her employer. Applicant 
responded to this setback with energy and determination. She attempted to sell her 
properties, and she continued to meet all of her other financial obligations. I observed 
Applicant carefully at her hearing, and I assessed her credibility. I have no doubt that 
she will honor any legal financial obligations that arise from the ownership of her two 
investment properties. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future she will fail to carry 
out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security clearance and the 
protection of classified information. I conclude that she is not a security risk. 
 
Applicant is a serious and responsible person. She has shown good faith in 
contacting her creditors and working with them to resolve or alleviate her indebtedness. 
She is currently living within her means and paying attention to her financial obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:          For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it  is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
