 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-02029 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 10, 2008. On 
June 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline H. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 17, 2009; answered it on June 29, 2009; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
July 6, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 8, 2009, and 
the case was assigned to me on September 10, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on October 5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 20, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 
28, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense contractor. 
He was hired as an intern in June 2002 and became a full-time employee in August 
2002 (Tr. 17, 26). He received a security clearance in September 2002, and he is 
seeking to continue it (Tr. 6).  
 
 Applicant graduated from college in June 2001 with a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering. He did not disclose any drug involvement when he applied for 
and received a clearance in 2002 (Tr. 60). When he submitted his application to 
continue his security clearance in November 2008, he disclosed that he used marijuana 
two or three times between 1997 and 2002, while he was in college, and three times 
after receiving his security clearance (GX 1 at 42-43; Tr. 32). He repeated his 
disclosures during a security interview in December 2008 (GX 2 at 7), and in response 
to DOHA interrogatories in May 2009 (GX 2 at 2-3). In his response to DOHA 
interrogatories, he stated that he decided to stop using marijuana because he was 
approaching his 30th birthday and thinking of his future, and he realized that his 
marijuana use was foolish and immature (GX 2 at 2).  
 
 Applicant is unmarried and has no children. He has been in a committed 
relationship with his girlfriend for three years, but they are not formally engaged to be 
married (Tr. 24). His girlfriend describes him as loyal and dedicated to his loved ones, a 
perfectionist, and a person of high integrity and trustworthiness (AX F-7). 
 
At the hearing, Applicant submitted a notarized statement declaring that his last 
marijuana use was in September 2008, promising that he will not use marijuana in the 
future, and agreeing that any further “drug-related incident” will result in revocation of 
his security clearance (AX A). He testified he does not associate with current marijuana 
users, except for one friend that he has known since he graduated from high school. He 
sees his friend once or twice a month (Tr. 44). He has informed his friend that he does 
not intend to use marijuana again and that he will leave the area if it is used in his 
presence (Tr. 35). He testified his last use of marijuana was with this friend and his 
current girlfriend (Tr. 48). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend also stopped using marijuana in September 2008. He 
testified that his girlfriend understands that his career makes marijuana use 
unacceptable (Tr. 49-50). He testified that if he found out his girlfriend was still smoking 
marijuana, he would ask her to stop and to dispose of any marijuana in her possession. 
When asked what he would do if his girlfriend refused to stop using marijuana, he 
declared that he would leave her if necessary (Tr. 52). 
 
Applicant testified that he found his use of marijuana a pleasant experience, but it 
is no longer attractive to him because it is not consistent with his job (Tr. 52-56). He 
expressed remorse for his “stupid decisions” to use marijuana while holding a clearance 
(Tr. 42-43). He admitted he did not disclose his marijuana use when he applied for a 
clearance in 2002. He testified he decided to disclose his marijuana use on his most 
recent application because he knew that his past marijuana use made him vulnerable to 
blackmail (Tr. 58-61).  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluation for 2003 rated him as “competent” on a four-
category scale (needs improvement, competent, commendable, and outstanding) (AX 
B-6). In February 2005, he was rated as “exceeds expectations” on a different four-
category scale (needs improvement, meets expectations, exceeds expectations, and far 
exceeds expectations) (AX B-5). In March 2006, he received the top numerical rating 
(“4”) (AX B-4). He received a “3” rating in March 2007 (AX B-3), and “4” ratings in March 
2008 and February 2009 (AX B-1; AX B-2). 
 
 Applicant has received three cash awards for timely performance (AX C-1, AX C-
3, and AX C-5). His division director has recognized him for being one of two nominees 
for employee of the quarter (AX C-2), he has been selected once as employee of the 
quarter (AX C-4), and he has been nominated for an annual award (AX C-6). He has 
received frequent pay raises, starting out at $44,200 as an intern, beginning as a full-
time employee at $54,000, and currently earning $94,683 (AX D). 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor regards him as trustworthy, dependable and honest, 
with integrity beyond reproach (AX F-2). His program manager considers him the most 
knowledgeable systems engineer on the team, and she describes him as highly 
respected, dedicated, honest, and helpful (AX F-1). A former classmate and roommate 
considers him a person of high integrity and respect for the law (AX F-3). The friend with 
whom Applicant last used marijuana (a partner in a law firm) describes him as a man of 
great conviction who is passionate about his work (AX F-4). His parents both describe 
him as a person of great integrity, reliability and high ethics who loves and is dedicated 
to his family (AX F-5; AX F-6). His girlfriend considers him a person of high integrity who 
is loyal and dedicated to his loved ones (AX F-7). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
4 
 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana approximately three times from 
September 1997 to 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and he used marijuana approximately three 
times from 2002 until September 2008, while holding a security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
Applicant admitted both allegations. His disclosures in his security clearance 
application, responses to DOHA interrogatories, answer to the SOR, and testimony at 
the hearing are the only evidence of his marijuana use. 
 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse 
of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. Guideline H encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 
24(a)(1).  
 
The evidence raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
 
6 
 
 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant used marijuana about six times in eleven years. Six occasions of use 
over an eleven-year period do not constitute “infrequent” use, but they demonstrate that 
Applicant’s one-year period of abstinence is not unusual by itself. His marijuana use did 
not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. What is significant about 
Applicant’s decision to stop using marijuana in September 2008 is that it occurred 
shortly before he submitted his application to continue his clearance, in which he put his 
clearance and his job on the line by disclosing his marijuana use and his falsification of 
his earlier security clearance application. His decision to fully disclose his conduct, 
coupled with his statement of intent with provision for automatic revocation of any 
clearance (discussed below), demonstrate that he has changed his behavior, and he 
has decided that his job is more important and rewarding than his periodic use of 
marijuana. His disclosures in his most recent security clearance application, his candid 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, his answer to the SOR, and his testimony at the 
hearing demonstrate “conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” I 
conclude AG ¶ 26(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant continues to associate 
with his marijuana-using friend, albeit infrequently. He is in a committed long-term 
relationship with his girlfriend, with whom he smoked marijuana. His environment is 
essentially unchanged from September 2008. I conclude that AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and (2) are 
not established, but AG ¶ 26(b)(3) and (4) are established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is an articulate, intelligent, well-educated young adult. He has held a 
clearance for more than seven years. He is highly regarded by his superiors. He 
presented himself as candid and sincere at the hearing. I have considered the 
possibility that he chose to give “correct” and self-serving responses to questions about 
his past marijuana use and future intentions, and I am satisfied that his stated intentions 
are sincere. There is no evidence of physical or psychological addiction. The evidence 
indicates that Applicant has decided that his job is more important than the pleasure of 
smoking a marijuana cigarette with friends. In November 2008, he was faced with a 
choice of continuing to conceal his marijuana use or disclosing it and putting his job at 
risk. But for his full disclosure, his discrete use of marijuana with his girlfriend and a 
long-time friend might well have gone undetected. By submitting his statement of intent, 
he placed himself on probation; and by disclosing his marijuana use, he has made 
himself subject to closer scrutiny.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on his drug involvement. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
