                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03110 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1966, Applicant was born in Jordan. In 1988, he immigrated to the United 
States. In 2001, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse and two children are U.S. 
citizens. However, he has retained significant connections to Jordan. He traveled to 
Jordan in 2004 and in May 2009. He has siblings living in Jordan, and owns a share of 
some property in Jordan. He was equivocal about the future status of his Jordanian 
passport and citizenship. Access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 10, 
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
President on December 29, 2005. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 17, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (HE 3). On September 16, 2009, Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed. On September 21, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. On 
October 19, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice (HE 1).1 On October 30, 2009, the 
hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GE 1-2) 
(Transcript (Tr.) 24-25), and Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 28). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GE 1-2 (Tr. 26). I received the transcript on November 5, 
2009.    
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Jordan (Tr. 17-18; HE 4, AN Request). Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for these facts (HE 4, Ex. I to IV). Applicant did 
not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request (Tr. 18). 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). 
  
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s response to the SOR admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e, and 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a (HE 3). He explained or clarified the facts 
relating to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a (HE 3). His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a government contractor who is seeking a 
security clearance (Tr. 6). He has been employed by the same employer for the last 22 
 
1Applicant waived his right to 15-days notice of the date, time and place for his hearing (Tr. 15-
16). 
 
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
months (Tr. 40). In 1997, he received a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. college with a 
major in electrical and computer engineering (Tr. 6-7). He married his first wife in 1995, 
and they were divorced in 2000 (GE 1). In December 2002, he married his wife in 
Jordan (Tr. 45; GE 1).  He has never served in the U.S. military (GE 1). 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Jordan and attended school in Jordan through his second 
year of college (Tr. 38). He was drafted into Jordan’s Army (Tr. 56). From 1986 to 1988, 
he served in the Jordanian Army; however, he was not an officer (Tr. 56-57; GE 2 at 5). 
He immigrated to the United States in 1988 (Tr. 38). In 2001, he became a U.S. citizen 
(GE 1; GE 2 at 32). 
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Jordan (Tr. 45). In 2002, she moved to the United 
States (Tr. 45). In 2006, she became a citizen of the United States (Tr. 58; GE 1). 
Applicant and his wife have two children who are ages six and 15 months (Tr. 46). Both 
of his children were born in the United States (Tr. 46). His son has been to Jordan 
twice, and both times his son traveled on his U.S. passport (Tr. 46). He has not applied 
for Jordanian citizenship for his children (Tr. 47).  
 
Applicant’s father is deceased (GE 1). His mother is a dual citizen of Jordan and 
the United States. She owns land in Jordan. She spends approximately eight months 
per year in the United States and four months per year in Jordan (Tr. 40-41; SOR ¶ 
1.a). When she stays in the United States, she lives with Applicant or his brother (Tr. 
41). She lives with Applicant about four months each year (Tr. 41). When she is in 
Jordan, Applicant communicates with her about once a month (Tr. 42). His mother is a 
housewife (Tr. 42).  
 
Applicant has six brothers who are citizens and residents of Jordan (Tr. 43-44; 
GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.b). Two of his brothers visit Applicant every year or so in the United 
States (Tr. 55). He talks to one of his brothers every couple of months on average (Tr. 
55). Sometimes he communicates with one of his brothers more frequently, perhaps 
once a month (Tr. 55).  
 
Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Jordan (Tr. 43-44; GE 
2; SOR ¶ 1.c). One of Applicant’s sisters married a Jordanian who became a German 
citizen (Tr. 44-45; GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.d). They now reside in Germany (Tr. 44-45; GE 2; 
SOR ¶ 1.d). She is a Jordanian citizen (Tr. 43-44; GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens of Jordan (Tr. 43-44; GE 
2; SOR ¶ 1.e). They are both retired teachers (Tr. 47). His father-in-law moved to the 
United States from Jordan in September 2009, and his mother-in-law moved to the 
United States in October 2009 (Tr. 48). They have applied for U.S. residency (Tr. 47). 
His in-laws are now living with Applicant (Tr. 48). When his in-laws lived in Jordan, 
Applicant communicated with them every few days, and he visited them when he went 
to Jordan (Tr. 48). In the last five years he visited Jordan twice, in 2004 and May 2009 
(GE 2 at 21, 28, 35).  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
 Applicant owns a home in the United States and has a bank account in the 
United States (Tr. 58-59). He votes in U.S. elections (Tr. 59). One of his brothers is a 
U.S. citizen (Tr. 59).  
 
 Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant maintains his Jordanian citizenship for three reasons: (1) he wanted to 
protect his inheritance in Jordan; (2) it is more convenient for him to keep a Jordanian 
passport than to obtain a visa to visit Jordan; and (3) he learned that renouncing his 
Jordanian citizenship would be expensive (Tr. 49; SOR ¶ 2.a). Applicant said he would 
be willing to give up or renounce his Jordanian citizenship and destroy his Jordanian 
passport, if he knew he would receive a clearance (Tr. 42-43, 49; GE 2 at 4, 13). He 
held an active Jordanian passport from 2002 to 2007 (GE 1). At his hearing, he said he 
obtained his Jordanian passport before he became a U.S. citizen (GE 2 at 4); however, 
this is incorrect because he became a U.S. citizen in 2001. His Jordanian passport 
expired in January 2007 (Tr. 68; GE 2 at 3). He used his Jordanian passport in 2004 to 
visit Jordan and Syria (GE 2 at 3). His Jordanian inheritance is a share in a three-unit 
apartment, and he valued it at about $8,000 to $10,000 (Tr. 49-53). When his mother 
goes to Jordan, she stays in one of the apartments (Tr. 51). Two of his brothers also live 
in the apartments (Tr. 51).   
 
Applicant loves the United States (Tr. 54). He wants to raise his children in the 
United States because of the freedom and equality in the United States (Tr. 54). In 
Jordan there is discrimination between people that is not present in the United States 
(Tr. 60). In the United States there is freedom of speech, and hard work is rewarded (Tr. 
60). He considers the United States to be his home, and not Jordan (Tr. 59). 
 
Character Evidence 
 
There is no derogatory information concerning his police or financial records.3 He 
has never been fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal 
drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. 
 
The person who hired Applicant as an electrical engineer for a government 
contractor in 2007 and is now in his chain of supervision described him as an extremely 
good employee, very punctual, and one of his best workers (Tr. 30-35, 37). He said 
Applicant maintains the confidentiality of information and is very trustworthy (Tr. 36). He 
recommended that Applicant receive a security clearance (Tr. 36).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 The source for the facts in this paragraph is his security clearance application (GE 1). 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Jordan4 
 
Jordan is a small, Middle Eastern country governed by a constitutional monarchy. 
Jordan’s population is about 5.9 million. Jordan has a pro-Western foreign policy, and 
has had close relations with the United States for sixty years. Torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, overcrowded prisons, denial of due process, and restrictions on 
freedom of speech are Jordanian human rights problems. Despite aggressive 
governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Jordan remains high.  
Terrorists in Jordan target U.S. interests to exploit and undermine U.S. national security 
interests. Al-Qaida agents plotted to kill President Bush when he visited Jordan in 2006. 
Al-Qaida claims responsibility for the November 2005 bombings of three hotels, a rocket 
attack in August 2005, and the assassination of a U.S. diplomat in 2002.  
  
Terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence 
services. A Pew Research Center Global Attitudes survey in 2009 indicated 19 percent 
of Jordanian Muslims expressed confidence in Usama bin Ladin. The Pew survey noted 
that Jordan was the only Muslim country in which most residents had favorable opinions 
of HAMAS, a U.S. designated foreign terrorist organization.      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
4The facts in the section concerning Jordan are from Department Counsel’s factual summary, 
except for some comments about the relationship between the United States and Jordan, which are from 
the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Jordan, Feb. 2009, U.S. Department of State, Country 
Specific Information Sheet—Jordan, May 6, 2009, and the Jordan section of U.S. Department of State, 
Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, Chapter 2—Country Reports: Middle East and North African 
Overview, dated Apr. 30, 2009 (HE 4, enclosures I, II, and IV). 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign preference) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(d) apply. Applicant, his mother, brothers and sisters, 
father-in-law, and mother-in-law were born in Jordan. Six of his brothers and one sister 
currently reside in Jordan. Applicant’s mother lives with Applicant four months of the 
year, and she spends about four months a year in Jordan. Applicant’s father-in-law and 
mother-in-law have been living with Applicant for several months, and they are 
Jordanian citizens. His father-in-law and mother-in-law are not U.S. citizens. He visited 
Jordan in 2004 and May 2009. He has frequent communications with his mother when 
she is in Jordan and with his in-laws. 
 
Although Applicant’s communications with his siblings living in Jordan are not 
particularly frequent, his spouse may have more frequent, non-casual communications 
with family members living in Jordan. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
2002). Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. Applicant’s relationship with his 
mother because of her frequent and lengthy visits to Jordan is sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” Applicant’s relationships with his family members in Jordan creates a 
potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and [his] desire to help” any family members who are in 
Jordan. For example, when Applicant’s mother is visiting Jordan, Applicant would be 
exposed to a risk of coercion through his mother.  Applicant is also subject to potential 
coercion through his relationships with his in-laws. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Jordan, is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Jordan with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Jordan or who are Jordanian citizens do not pose a 
security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member 
living in Jordan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Applicant has an interest in a property in Jordan valued at about $10,000. This 
interest is sufficient to raise a security concern under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
Applicant’s mother lives with him for about four months per year, with his brother 
in the United States for about four months per year, and in Jordan the other four months 
each year. For the last two months, Applicant’s in-laws have lived with Applicant. His in-
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
laws are Jordanian citizens, and they are not U.S. citizens. His mother and in-laws have 
very close connections to Jordan and to their relatives living in Jordan. His in-laws and 
mother are likely to return to Jordan for lengthy periods, where they will be potentially be 
exposed to pressure and coercion from terrorists. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Jordan seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International 
terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable 
state intelligence services, and Jordan has a problem with terrorism. Applicant’s 
relationship with family members living in Jordan or who are very likely to return to 
Jordan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently 
close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in Jordan 
endangered by terrorists by providing sensitive or classified information. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his mother, in-laws, 
and siblings and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant visited Jordan in 2004 
and May 2009. Applicant has frequent contact with his mother and in-laws, who live in 
Jordan for significant periods of time. However, he does not have frequent contacts with 
his siblings who live in Jordan. His relationships with his siblings in Jordan are mitigated 
under AG ¶ 8(c) because his contacts and communication with them is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. However, because of his connections to Jordan and to his in-laws and 
mother, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationships with his relatives who are Jordan citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
family connections to the United States. Although his mother and spouse were born in 
Jordan, his mother, spouse, and two children are all U.S. citizens and now live in the 
United States. One of his brothers is a now a U.S. citizen. Applicant owns a house in 
the United States and has a bank account in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members who 
either live in Jordan or spend extended periods of time visiting Jordan. He frequently 
communicates with his mother and in-laws and less frequently with his siblings. There is 
no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Jordan Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in Jordan 
to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is 
a reduced possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected 
as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. While the government does not have 
any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was 
present, Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
long history of a good relationship with Jordan.   
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Jordan. Applicant is not required 
to report his contacts with family members living in Jordan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to mitigate the security concern raised by his property interest 
in Jordan. In comparison to his property interests in the United States, and his 
employment in the United States, the value of his property in Jordan is such that it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, 
or pressure him. However, this mitigating condition can only fully mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with his 
mother, spouse, and in-laws. There is a risk that these relatives may be subject to 
pressure or coercion from terrorists either directly during their visits to Jordan, or 
indirectly through other relatives and friends living in Jordan.     
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
In 2002, after Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he received a Jordanian passport. 
In 2004, he used the Jordanian passport to visit Jordan. He said in his response to 
DOHA interrogatories that he maintained his Jordanian citizenship to protect his interest 
in his Jordanian property. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(a)(5) apply. 
 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
AG ¶ 11(e) applies and mitigates any concern about Applicant’s possession of a 
Jordanian passport from 2002 to 2007. None of the other mitigating conditions fully 
apply. He offered to renounce his Jordanian citizenship provided he receive a security 
clearance.     
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. In 1988, 
Applicant immigrated to the United States. In 2001, he became a U.S. citizen. His 
spouse, mother, brother, and two children are U.S. citizens. He owns property in the 
United States, has a U.S. bank account, votes in U.S. elections, and has U.S. 
employment. He does not have frequent contacts with his siblings who live in Jordan. 
There is no derogatory information concerning his police or financial records. He has 
never been fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal 
drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. One character witness endorsed 
approval of a security clearance for Applicant. He loves the United States and wants to 
raise his children in the United States because of the freedom and equality in the United 
States. He considers the United States to be his home, and not Jordan.  
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of a clearance for Applicant are 
more significant than the factors weighing towards grant of his clearance. Applicant, his 
brothers, sisters, mother, wife, father-in-law and mother-in-law were born in Jordan. 
Applicant went to Jordan in 2004 and in May 2009. His mother visits Jordan for four 
months annually, and lives with Applicant for four months annually. His in-laws have 
been living with Applicant for about two months before his hearing. He frequently 
communicates with his mother and in-laws while they are living in Jordan.   
  
Applicant said he wanted to maintain his Jordanian citizenship for three reasons: 
(1) he wanted to protect his inheritance in Jordan; (2) it is more convenient for him to 
keep a Jordanian passport than to obtain a visa to visit Jordan; and (3) he learned that 
renouncing his Jordanian citizenship would be expensive. Applicant’s offer to give up 
his Jordanian citizenship if he would receive a clearance is a conditional offer and does 
not fully mitigate concerns. He held an active Jordanian passport from 2002 to 2007, 
and he did not rule out renewing his Jordanian passport. He used his Jordanian 
passport in 2004 to visit Jordan and Syria. His Jordanian inheritance is a share in a 
three-unit apartment, and he valued it at about $8,000 to $10,000.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Jordan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Jordan, as well as the dangers existing in Jordan.5 The danger 
of violence or coercion from terrorists in Jordan is a more dangerous than in many 
countries. Terrorists continue to threaten the government of Jordan, and the interests of 
the United States, as well as those who cooperate and assist the United States. The 
United States and Jordan are allies in the war on terrorism. Jordan and the United 
States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, I conclude he has mitigated the 
foreign preference security concerns; however, he has not carried his burden of 
mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”6 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.d: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
