  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00432 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O'Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1980 to 1984, 1988 to 1990, and August 2007 to 
September 2008. In August 1996, Applicant had obtained a secret security clearance. In 
November 2005, he obtained a top secret security clearance. Applicant has failed to 
rebut or mitigate drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 9, 2009, detailing security concerns under drug 
involvement and personal conduct. 
 
 On August 7, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated September 9, 2009. The FORM contained nine 
attachments described as “Items.” On September 23, 2009, Applicant received a copy 
of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on November 25, 2009. As of December 2, 2009, no response had 
been received. On December 7, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the factual allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old software design engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since September 2001, and is seeking to maintain a secret security 
clearance. In August 1996, Applicant obtained a secret security clearance. (Item 5, 
page 6 of 10) In November 2005, he was granted a top secret security clearance. (Item 
9) 
 
In July 2005, Applicant was interviewed concerning his marijuana usage. (Item 6) 
Applicant used marijuana from 1980 to 1984 and 1988 to 1990. He used marijuana two 
or three times a week, spending $50 per month for marijuana. (Item 6) In January 1983, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana. He was fined. 
Applicant reported this offense on his Security Clearance Application, Standard Form 
(SF) 86. (Item 5) He did not use marijuana from 1984 to 1988 because it was not 
available. In 1990, he voluntarily attended counseling concerning his marijuana use. He 
attended counseling once a week for approximately a year and a half. As of July 2005, 
Applicant had no intention to use illegal drugs in the future.  
 
 Applicant suffered from anxiety and a lack of sleep. From 1999 to 2002, he was 
prescribed Prozac. In August 2007, when he thought his medication was not working as 
it should, he decided to “self-medicate” with marijuana. (Item 6) His medication was 
changed from Prozac to Paxil. Applicant used marijuana from August 2007 to 
September 2008. Applicant obtained marijuana from his nephew and used it twice a 
week. The marijuana helped him to sleep. In May 2008, he stopped smoking marijuana. 
(Item 6)  
 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 In June 2008, Applicant self-reported his marijuana usage and sought help from 
his company’s employee assistance program to refrain from using marijuana and to 
resolve his anxiety. (Item 6) From June 2008 through November 2008, he was treated 
by a licensed clinical social worker for a condition diagnosed, in part, as cannabis 
abuse. (Item 8) Applicant asserts he last used marijuana in September 2008, three 
months after he began counseling. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to 
drug involvement in that the use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession 
of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse 
or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who, is a staff member of a 
recognized drug treatment program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program 
prescribed by a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to 
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1980 to 1984, 1988 to 1990, and August 2007 to 
September 2008. In 1983, he was arrested, charged, and fined for possession of 
marijuana. His arrest and fine did not stop his marijuana usage. It was not until 1984 
that he first stopped using marijuana and that period of non-use lasted only four years. 
In 1996, Applicant had obtained a secret clearance, and in 2005, he obtained a top 
secret clearance. Even with a clearance, Applicant used marijuana. In June 2008, he 
was diagnosed with cannabis abuse. AG ¶ 25(a) drug abuse, AG ¶ 25(c) possessing 
and purchasing illegal drugs, AG ¶ 25(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence 
by a licensed clinical social worker, and AG ¶ 25(g) any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance, apply.  
 
In 1990, Applicant received counseling for his marijuana use and again from 
June 2008 through November 2008, Applicant received treatment. I do not find 
Applicant’s seeking treatment to be a disqualifying condition. I find for him as to SOR ¶¶ 
1(d) and 1 (e). 
 
AG ¶ 26 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, 
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs 
were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or 
prolonged illness during which these drugs were prescribed, 
and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
None of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns apply. AG ¶ 26(a) 
does not apply because Applicant use was frequent and recent. AG ¶ 26(b) does not 
apply. Applicant asserts he will no longer use marijuana. Because Applicant chose to 
have this matter handled administratively, I am unable to: test the veracity of his 
assertions; to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or to form a positive determination 
as to his truthfulness;  to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Applicant last 
used marijuana in September 2008, slightly more than one year ago. This period of 
abstinence is insufficient to insure Applicant will not return to using marijuana. 
Additionally, Applicant had abstained from marijuana usage for 17 years before using 
marijuana again. Applicant has not signed any statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because prescription drugs were not abused. AG ¶ 
26(d) does not apply because there is no favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
With respect to the personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s marijuana 
use after being granted a clearance (SOR ¶ 2.b), the pertinent disqualifying condition is 
AG ¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule violations. Marijuana use while holding a security 
clearance violated important civil and criminal rules in our society, and a history of such 
problems is conduct a person might wish to conceal, as it adversely affects a person’s 
professional and community standing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply because 
omission, concealment, or falsification was not alleged. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply 
because there was no allegation of refusing or failing to cooperate with the security 
clearance  process. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because Applicant used marijuana after 
having obtained a clearance and that use occurred slightly more than one year ago. 
Applicant used marijuana to self-medicate his problem with anxiety. His marijuana use 
was not infrequent nor did it happen under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur or does not cast doubt on the his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant self-reported his marijuana usage and sought help from his company’s 
employee assistance program to help him refrain from using marijuana and to resolve 
his anxiety. AG ¶ 17(d) partially applies. Applicant has expressed his desire to refrain 
from marijuana use and sought counseling. In 1990, Applicant received counseling and 
had no intention to use illegal drugs in the future. However, he returned to marijuana 
usage.  He again received counseling and again intends to refrain from using marijuana. 
 
In AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” does not apply to Applicant’s 
marijuana use after being granted a clearance. There is no showing Applicant has taken 
positive steps to eliminating any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
Any personal conduct security concerns pertaining to his marijuana use after being 
granted a clearance is dealt with more thoroughly under the specific, pertinent 
guidelines. For example, drug use is best addressed under the drug involvement 
guideline in this decision.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to find Applicant has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply because the information 
was substantiated. AG ¶ 17(g) does not apply. There is no showing Applicant has 
ceased his involvement with persons involved in criminal activity. The only alleged 
person involved in criminal contact was Applicant’s nephew from which Applicant 
purchased his marijuana. Applicant’s current contact with is nephew is unknown. 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana 
periodically. He used it after being arrested for possession and after periods where he 
abstained or refrained from using it for years. His use occurred over a 27-year period. 
From 1980 until 1994, Applicant used marijuana, then abstained from using it for four 
years before using again. He used marijuana again for two years before a 17-year 
period where he abstained or refrained from its use. In August 2007, he again started 
using marijuana. His only explanation for using marijuana was that he suffered from 
anxiety and his medication was not working.  
 
Applicant’s use of illegal drugs is serious and recent. He did not satisfactorily 
explain why he returned to marijuana use after such a long absence or why he used 
marijuana after having obtained his security clearance. I am unable to find that illegal 
drugs are no longer a part of his life. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his illegal drug usage and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
