 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-02071 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 11, 2008. On 
July 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 24, 2009; answered it on August 12, 2009; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
August 13, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 31, 2009, and 
the case was assigned to me on September 2, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on September 2, 2009, scheduling the hearing for September 24, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which 
was admitted without objection. I kept the record open until October 9, 2009, to allow 
her to submit additional documentary evidence, but she submitted no additional 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 19 delinquent debts totaling 
about $37,000 alleged in SOR¶¶ 1.a-1.s. Her admissions in her answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old communications technician employed by a defense 
contractor. She has worked for her current employer since July 2007. She served on 
active duty in the U.S. Navy from May 1998 to March 2007. She held a security 
clearance in the Navy and retained it when she began working for her current employer. 
 
 Applicant has never been married, but she has six children by five fathers. The 
first four children were born while she was in the Navy. Two of her children live with her 
parents (GX 2 at 10). Her 5-year-old son is autistic (GX 2 at 9). Only the father of the 
youngest children, one-year-old twin girls, pays child support (GX 2 at 10; Tr. 46).  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting net 
monthly income of $3,348, and expenses of $2,730. It does not reflect any debt 
payments (GX 2 at 4).  
 
 The debts underlying the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e were incurred 
when Applicant moved out of various apartments before the expiration of her leases (Tr. 
51-54). She testified the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.g was for a loan obtained by identity theft, 
and that she told the creditor that the loan was fraudulent. When the creditor sued her, 
she did not appear in court and a default judgment was entered against her (GX 4 at 1; 
Tr. 43-44). 
 
Applicant testified the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.m were incurred for her 
twins and were the responsibility of their father (Tr. 38). She testified she had initiated 
legal action to compel their father to pay the medical bills (Tr. 60-61). I kept the record 
open to allow her to produce documents showing their father’s obligation to pay the 
medical bills and any documents pertaining to legal action she initiated to enforce them 
(Tr. 67-70). She did not produce any documentation.  
 
 Applicant testified the debt for cell phone service alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s was 
incurred by her sister. She has taken no action to dispute this debt. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that her pay has been garnished to satisfy the judgments in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. When those judgments are satisfied, garnishments will be applied to 
the $13,743 car repossession deficiency in SOR ¶ 1.n and the $4,343 judgment for the 
unpaid personal loan in SOR ¶ 1.g (Tr. 56-57). Her pay statements for the two-week 
periods ending on March 20, 2009, and April 3, 2009, reflected wage garnishments of 
$1,771 (GX 2 at 31. 33). At the hearing, Applicant submitted a pay statement for the 
period ending on September 4, 2009, reflecting a wage garnishment of $3,475 (AX A). 
She has not done anything to resolve the remaining debts (Tr. 59).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
 
4 
 
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges six unsatisfied judgments (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.g), a car 
repossession deficiency (SOR ¶ 1.n), five medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.m), and seven 
other delinquent debts. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
The evidence raises all three disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
 
5 
 
 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are ongoing, numerous, and did 
not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The medical expenses for 
Applicant’s twin daughters were beyond her control, but she has not acted responsibly. 
Her reaction to all her debts has been passive, allowing judgments to be entered 
against her and allowing her pay to be garnished. She was given additional time to 
produce evidence of her children’s father’s agreement to pay the medical bills, but she 
produced nothing. I conclude this mitigating condition is not established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant produced no evidence of 
counseling and her financial situation is not under control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant has done virtually nothing to resolve her debts. Her response has 
been passive, allowing judgments to be entered against her and allowing her pay to be 
garnished. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). At the 
hearing, Applicant disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.g and the cell phone bill in SOR ¶ 
1.s, but she has done nothing to contest those debts. She allowed a default judgment to 
be entered against her for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g and has not filed a credit report dispute 
for the cell phone debt in SOR ¶ 1.s that she attributes to her sister. She produced no 
additional evidence after the hearing, even though she testified at the hearing that such 
evidence was available. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude she has 
not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
