 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00347 
  )   
  ) ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated Drug Involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 24, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 30, 2009, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
November 4, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf but did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted a letter, which was 
marked Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on November 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since February 
2008. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. He is single with no 
children. He and his girlfriend live together.1  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana in about December 2003. Between 
December 2003 and April 2007, he used marijuana about three to four times a week. 
He purchased small amounts of marijuana for his use. Applicant used psilocybin 
mushrooms on two occasions in 2004 and 2005. He did not enjoy the experience and 
has not used them since.2  
 
Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since April 2007. His girlfriend is 
vehemently opposed to illegal drug use, as her brother died of a drug overdose. 
Applicant plans on proposing to her in several months and would not want to disappoint 
her. The group he used to use drugs with has essentially disbanded. He occasionally 
sees several of his old friends, but the friends he still has contact with have either 
stopped using drugs or keep their drug use to themselves. Applicant recently purchased 
a home.3  
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
May 21, 2008. He fully listed his illegal drug use. He was questioned by an investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on July 16, 2008, and fully discussed 
his drug use. He stated that he no longer used illegal drugs but could not rule out the 
possibility of use in the future. He was open, honest, and candid about his drug use at 
his hearing. He admitted that he exhibited extremely poor judgment when he used 
illegal drugs. He stated that he was attempting to be completely honest with the OPM 
investigator. His commitment to being completely drug-free has crystallized since the 
interview. He credibly testified that he will never use illegal drugs again. He submitted a 
statement of intent not to abuse any illegal drugs in the future with automatic revocation 
of clearance for any violation.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16, 30-31; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 15-19, 23-25; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 14-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;5 and  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
as disqualifying conditions.   
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant stopped using illegal drugs in April 2007. He disassociated himself from 
his drug-using friends and avoided the environment where drugs were used. His 
girlfriend is adamantly opposed to illegal drug use. He has a good job and has recently 
                                                          
5 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
5 
 
purchased a home. He is going to propose to his girlfriend. He signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He clearly, unequivocally, 
and credibly committed to remaining drug-free. I find an appropriate period of 
abstinence and that illegal drug use is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
young man who regularly used illegal drugs, almost exclusively marijuana, for several 
years. He matured and stopped using illegal drugs in April 2007, before he started work 
for his current employer in February 2008 and applied for a security clearance in May 
2008. He and his girlfriend live in a house he recently purchased. She is vehemently 
opposed to illegal drug use, having lost her brother to a drug overdose. He enjoys his 
job. He no longer associates with most of the people he used drugs with. The few he 
still occasionally sees have either stopped using drugs or keep their drug use hidden 
from him. Applicant credibly testified to a firm commitment to remaining drug-free.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Drug Involvement security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
