 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-05021
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the security concern caused by the delinquent accounts listed
in his credit reports. His financial problems began after he was medically discharged from
the Marine Corps, and then had to undergo numerous surgeries that prevented him from
obtaining replacement employment. Applicant has now either resolved, or taken substantial
steps to resolve, the majority of his delinquent accounts. Clearance is granted.
On August 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR, dated August 25, 2009, admitted all SOR allegations
except those contained is subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h, and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on September 29, 2009. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 7, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 23, 2009. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted four documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4 and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted 11 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant’s
Exhibits (AE) 1-11 and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was
received on November 3, 2009.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 31-year-old man who has been employed as an aircraft structural
mechanic  by a defense contractor since February 2009. He served on active duty in the
Marine Corps from July 1996 until he was medically discharged in July 2001. He was either
unemployed or attended college as a full-time student from July 2001 until October 2007.
He worked as a fund raiser, earning $8.25 an hour, from October 2007 until January 2008.
He worked as a customer service representative, earning $12.38 an hour, from January
2008 until February 2009. His present employment pays him $21.39 an hour.
Applicant’s military career ended as a result of a severe leg injury he sustained in
November 1999. He underwent surgery for the injury but had to be medically discharged
as a result of the injury. He was given approximately $17,000 in severance pay, but was
unable to obtain any disability payment from the Veterans’ Administration (VA) until the
severance pay was repaid from the 10% disability rating he was eventually awarded.
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) disclose he was current with his debts prior to
being medically discharged from the Marine Corps.
Following his discharge from the Marine Corps, Applicant underwent six or seven
further surgeries on his leg at a VA hospital. The surgeries were performed on the leg that
was not injured while he was in the Marine Corps but were attributable to complications
that arose from the original injury. Applicant was unable to work for several years following
his discharge because the issues with his legs impeded his ability to walk. Once he
completed the surgeries, he attended college and was awarded a bachelor of science
degree in business administration in August 2007.
Applicant was first married in November 1998. That marriage ended in divorce in
July 2001. No children were born of the marriage, but Applicant testified a substantial
portion of the severance pay he received from the Marine Corps was expended during the
course of the divorce proceedings. Applicant has been remarried since May 2005. He has
a step-child, age 13, from this marriage.
The debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.a is a $14,406 judgment that was entered
against Applicant as the result of an automobile accident. His automobile insurance
company declined to cover the damages from the accident claiming it had terminated his
coverage shortly before the accident. Applicant began making $75 monthly payments to
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
3
satisfy the judgment about five years ago. He increased the monthly payments to $100
once he obtained his current employment. As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had paid
$4,646 toward the judgment and reduced the amount owing, including accumulated
interest, to $10,394.51.
Applicant submitted verification at the hearing that he has satisfied the debts listed
in SOR subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, 1.l, and 1.m. He successfully disputed the debt listed
in SOR subparagraph 1.d when the creditor agreed it had erred in claiming that he had
failed to return cable television equipment. Appellant is currently making $150 monthly
payments to satisfy the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.n. The debt listed in SOR
subparagraph 1.i is a duplicate entry of the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.b.
In 2006, Applicant became ill and passed out in his automobile while his wife was
driving him to a VA hospital. Concerned for his immediate well-being, she diverted to a
civilian hospital where he was subsequently hospitalized for four days. Applicant did not
have health insurance at the time. The debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j,
1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n all arose from this hospitalization. As noted above, Applicant has
either satisfied or entered into repayment plans on several of those debts. However, the
collection agency holding the debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g has
refused to provide Applicant any information concerning those debts, and he has refused
to pay them believing they are included in the other medical debts that he has either paid
or on which he is making payments. The debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k are
duplicate entries of the debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f and 1.g.      
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F
(financial considerations), with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant
in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant had a number of accounts that became delinquent while he was
unemployed and attending college after he was medically discharged from the Marine
Corps in 2001. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant’s CBRs disclose he was current at all times with his debt payments before
he was medically discharged from the Marine Corps. A large portion of the severance pay
he received was expended during the course of his divorce that occurred at the same time
as his discharge. He was forced to undergo numerous surgeries after his discharge that
prohibited him from obtaining employment. Once he was able to walk, he attended college
and quickly earned a degree. Shortly after graduating college he obtained full-time
employment, but at a low hourly rate. He followed that with a slightly better paying job
where he worked until he was able to acquire his present employment. Now that he is
5
earning a liveable wage, he has quickly satisfied, disputed, or entered into repayment plans
on the debts listed in the SOR. Additionally, he submitted proof that he has been making
regular payments for years that have resulted in a substantial reduction of the amount
owing on the largest debt listed in the SOR.  
Applicant is entitled to application of the following Mitigating Conditions (MC): MC
20(a): the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; MC 20(c): . . . there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and MC 20(e): the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial
considerations security concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his
ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-n: For Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

