Item 1.1
Item 2.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------, ------ ----- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03764
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred significant delinquent debts between 2000 and 2005 while
unsuccessfully attempting self-employment as a consultant. He filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy relief in 2007, but the case was dismissed for failure to comply with plan
requirements. He recently began another Chapter 13 proceeding, but failed to show
ongoing solvency or otherwise mitigate security concerns. Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 3, 2008.  On1
March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,2
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Item 4.3
The Government submitted seven items in support of the SOR allegations.4
Item 1 at 6, 12, 18, 23-25, 29, 37.5
Items 5, 6, and 7.6
2
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 20, 2009, and requested that his
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.3
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 11, 2009. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and4
he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on August 19, 2009, and returned it to DOHA. On September 15, 2009, he submitted
additional evidence for consideration with a letter which contained no objection to
consideration of any evidence submitted by Department Counsel. On September 18,
2009, Department Counsel initialed a memorandum to indicate that he did not object to
the admissibility into evidence and consideration of the materials submitted by
Applicant. I received the case assignment on September 23, 2009. Applicant submitted
additional evidence for consideration on October 23, 2009, and November 9, 2009.
Department Counsel initialed a November 13, 2009, memorandum indicating that he
had no objection to consideration of this additional evidence. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since August 2008. He has no military service, and has never held a security
clearance. He is married with three children, ages 18, 7, and 4, and two stepchildren,
ages 19 and 16.  In his response to the SOR, he formally denied each allegation, but5
then made explanatory statements that admitted to each one. Applicant’s admissions,
including his statements in response to the FORM, are incorporated in the following
findings.
The credit bureau reports submitted by Department Counsel establish the
existence of Applicant’s 21 delinquent debts, totaling $304,663.  Included in that amount6
are two Federal income tax liens, totaling $71,918, and five state income tax liens for a
total of $20,495. Also included is the $170,000 outstanding balance on a mortgage loan
that was foreclosed in August 2005. Applicant claimed that the creditor resold the home
and the outstanding balance was less than $10,000 in his SOR response, but his June
15, 2009, credit report showed the full $170,000 still outstanding. Applicant provided no
7
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he said that he could not find a copy of the document showing the final
balance owed after the foreclosure sale, but it was less than $15,000. The latest creditor report to the credit
bureau on this debt was in September 2005, and there is no more current information in the record
corroborating that a sale occurred or what balance remains outstanding. Applicant listed this debt on his
bankruptcy schedule of unsecured creditors with an amount due of $1.
Applicant’s responses to the SOR (Item 4) and FORM; Items 5 and 6.8
Item 4 at 1; Item 7 at 3; FORM Response at 1, Attachments 1 and 2.9
Item 4 at 3-4; Applicant’s response to the FORM at 1, Attachments 3 to 5; Supplemental responses to10
FORM of Oct. 3, 2009, and Nov. 9, 2009.
3
evidence to substantiate his claim that this debt was partially satisfied through the sale
of the home.  If Applicant’s reports concerning resale of the home are accurate, his7
present delinquent debt is between $145,000 and $150,000. 
Applicant’s financial problems first arose after he was laid off from a company
where he worked from June 1997 to January 2000. Rather than seek other
employment, he opened a management consulting business that was not successful.
He continued this endeavor until September 2005, when he began working for another
company. The vast majority of Applicant’s delinquent debt arose during the 2000 to
2005 period.   8
On November 15, 2007, Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
relief. He made $5,080 in required payments to the assigned trustee until July 2008. At
the end of June 2008, he was involuntarily separated from the job he then held as part
of a reduction in force. He received two weeks of severance pay, but could not afford to
continue payments toward his Chapter 13 plan. He obtained his current job in August
2008, but the bankruptcy court dismissed the case on August 7, 2008, for failure to file
information. After disbursing $689 in attorney and trustee fees, $994 to the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS), and $777 to another creditor, the trustee returned the remaining
$2,620 to Applicant on September 2, 2008. This case was terminated by the bankruptcy
court on October 24, 2008.9
On July 20, 2009, Applicant and his wife filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy
petition. The schedule of creditors holding unsecured priority claims reflects a $103,500
claim for Federal taxes by the IRS, and a state tax claim of $18,500. The schedule for
unsecured nonpriority claims lists 49 debts totaling $103,384, including a contingent $1
placeholder claim for “possible deficiency on foreclosed home,” as discussed in footnote
7 below. The bankruptcy filing thus places his debt total at $225,384. This Chapter 13
plan requires Applicant to make 10 monthly payments of $300, followed by 47 monthly
payments of $550. The increase will coincide with the end of Applicant’s obligation to
pay child support for his eldest child. His total payments under the plan will be only
$28,850. The bankruptcy court directed Applicant’s employer to make these payments
directly to the trustee starting on August 19, 2009, and entered a final order confirming
the plan on November 3, 2009.  10
Applicant’s response to the FORM at 2, Attachments 6 through 10.11
4
Applicant submitted no evidence about his current income, living expenses, or
ability to make the required bankruptcy payments without incurring further delinquent
debt. He did pay required Federal income taxes up through 1999, and again from 2006
through 2008.  He neither claimed to have made, nor substantiated any payment11
toward any of his SOR-listed delinquencies. He also provided no evidence concerning
the quality of his professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or
his track record with respect to handling protected information and observation of
security procedures. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided
without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to
be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
FORM at 5, 7.12
5
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set
out in AG ¶ 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel argued that the evidence established security concerns
under four Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.12
Applicant is unable to satisfy his substantial delinquent debts and has sought
relief from having to pay the great majority of them through bankruptcy. He neither
claimed nor documented any effort to repay any of the creditors involved, other than
partial payments through his Chapter 13 bankruptcies. DC 19(a) is clearly established.
6
The evidence is insufficient to establish DC 19(b), in that Applicant’s
delinquencies primarily arose during the four and a half year period when he was
attempting to support his family through an unsuccessful self-employed consulting
business. I cannot confidently infer frivolous or irresponsible spending from the mere
existence of about $32,000 per year in delinquent debt under such circumstances, and
the record is devoid of other evidence that would demonstrate such spending.
Applicant has demonstrated a history of not meeting financial obligations,
including large Federal tax liabilities that he owes to the same Government he seeks to
convince that he is sufficiently trustworthy and reliable to be entrusted with its classified
information. Security concerns under DC 19(c) are also supported on this record.
Applicant regularly spent beyond his means from about January 2000 to about
September 2005, while he was self-employed. DC 19(e) thus applied during that period
of time. When he lost his home to foreclosure, and other delinquencies kept mounting,
he finally gave up the business and resumed regular employment with other companies.
Only a few minor new delinquencies could be considered to have arisen since that
period based on credit reports in the record, and those are insufficient to demonstrate
any consistent spending beyond Applicant’s means since late 2005. Accordingly, DC
19(e) supports no present security concerns independent of those arising under DC
19(a) and (c), as discussed above. The evidence supporting these two disqualifying
conditions requires a closer examination and balancing of resulting security concerns
with any potentially mitigating matters, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties in AG ¶ 20. Under MC 20(a), disqualifying conditions
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s
financial irresponsibility is recent, involves large sums and numerous creditors, and
continues to date. He remains substantially in debt, and he provided no evidence
concerning his current financial situation that would support a finding that delinquent
indebtedness is unlikely to recur. The evidence does not support application of this
potentially mitigating condition. 
Under MC 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant decided to
begin his own consulting business after being laid off in early 2000, rather than seek
another job. He offered no evidence that this decision was anything other than his own
free choice. His business was unsuccessful, yet he continued pursuing it for four and a
half years. He also did not demonstrate that he responsibly reduced non-essential
spending in reaction to his mounting debts. The evidence indicates that Applicant chose
to continue borrowing money on credit he knew he could not repay, and failed to pay his
7
Federal and state tax obligations. Even after regaining regular employment and income,
he sought bankruptcy relief rather than addressing his obligations to those who had
extended him that credit. Applicant has not established mitigation of his presently
delinquent debts, or of his financial history as a whole, under this provision.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under MC 20(c). Similarly, MC 20(d) applies where the evidence
shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.” Applicant demonstrated the beginning stages of mitigation under these
two provisions through his recently confirmed Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceedings.
However, the absence of any evidence showing his current solvency or ongoing ability
to support his family while meeting his bankruptcy obligations precludes present findings
of “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” or “a good-
faith effort.” His failure to successfully meet the requirements of his first Chapter 13
bankruptcy in 2008 casts further doubt in that regard absent a more significant record of
success on this attempt. Insufficient evidence was presented to alleviate the substantial
security concerns raised by the length and degree of financial irresponsibility that
continues to date. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature
individual who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the
security concerns expressed in the SOR. He chose to attempt self-employment in an
unsuccessful consulting business and incurred substantial and ongoing delinquent debt
to private creditors, as well as state and Federal tax authorities, as a result. 
8
Applicant failed to comply with the requirements of his first Chapter 13
bankruptcy proceeding, and only recently began the present Chapter 13 plan that
involves over $225,000 in debts and is scheduled to continue through May 2014. He
failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation or evidence of solvency from this point
forward, so recurrence cannot be said to be unlikely. He continues to bear financial
obligations for significant past debt and the ongoing support of his wife and their five
children. He accordingly remains subject to pressure, exploitation, or duress. The record
contains insufficient other evidence about his character, trustworthiness, or
responsibility to mitigate these concerns, or tending to make their continuation less
likely. 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
