KEYWORD: Personal Conduct
DIGEST: This 40-year-old security guard, who knowingly falsified three answers on his
security clearance application (SF 86), has a history of financial problems that continue to
exist.  In addition, he was terminated from his employment in 2001 because he failed a
random drug test.  Mitigation has not been established.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-17538.h1
DATE: 02/28/2007
DATE: February 28, 2007
In Re:
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17538
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire , Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
This 40-year-old security guard, who knowingly falsified three answers on his security
clearance application (SF 86), has a history of financial problems that continue to exist.  In
2
addition, he was terminated from his employment in 2001 because he failed a random drug
test.  Mitigation has not been established.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 29, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant.  The
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
required under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for the Applicant.  The SOR recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether a clearance should be
granted, denied or revoked.
On September 18, 2006, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth in the SOR,
and elected to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge on the basis of the
written record; i.e., without a hearing.  A File of Relevant Materials (FORM) was issued on
November 13, 2006, in which Applicant was informed that any response had to be submitted
wit/hin 30 days of receipt.  No response was submitted.  The case was referred to me for
determination on December 28, 2006.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  The February 24, 2005
SOR contains four (4) allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant denies
all four allegations.    
After considering the totality of the evidence, I make the following additional
FINDINGS OF FACT as to the status of each SOR allegation.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
Applicant falsified material facts on his security clearance application (SF 86), dated
May 26, 2005, in his response to the following questions:
1.a. - Question “21. Your Police Record - Felony Offenses   Have you ever been
charged with or convicted of any felony offense [with a single exception not applicable
here],” to which he answered “No”, and intentionally failed to disclose that he was arrested
3
on October 22, 1988, and charged with attempted murder, a felony; possession of a
controlled substance, a felony; and carrying a concealed weapon, a gross misdemeanor.
1.b. - Question “22. Your Police Record - Firearms/Explosives Offenses   [Such
offenses must be reported regardless of whether the record in the case has been “sealed” or
otherwise stricken from the court record.]  Have you ever been charged with or convicted of
any felony offense [with a single exception not applicable here],” to which he answered
“No”, and intentionally failed to disclose that he was arrested on October 22, 1988, and
charged with attempted murder, a felony; possession of a controlled substance, a felony; and
carrying a concealed weapon, a misdemeanor. 
1.c. - Question “24. Your Police Record - Alcohol/Drug Offenses   Have you ever
been charged with or convicted of any felony offense [with a single exception not applicable
here],” to which he answered “No”, and intentionally failed to disclose that he  was arrested
on October 22, 1988, and charged with attempted murder, a felony; possession of a
controlled substance, a felony; and carrying a concealed weapon, a misdemeanor.
1.d. - Applicant was terminated from his job with Company A on or about November
1, 2001, for violating company policy concerning company policy regarding drug use after
he failed a random urinalysis test. The test results indicated a positive result for
methamphetamines and amphetamines.  I find the test results to have been valid. 
POLICIES
Each adjudicative decision must also include an assessment of six generic factors
relevant the conduct, to include (1) Nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances; (2). Frequency and recency of the conduct; (3). Age of the applicant; (4). Motivation
of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken
with knowledge of the consequences involved; (5). Absence or presence of rehabilitation; and (6)
Probability that the circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future.  I have considered
all six factors, individually and collectively, in reaching my overall conclusion.
The eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive
5220.6 identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the
ultimate question of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” for an
individual to hold a security clearance.  An applicant’s admission of the information in
specific allegations relieves the Government of having to prove those allegations.  If specific
allegations and/or information are denied or otherwise controverted by the applicant, the
Government has the initial burden of proving those controverted facts alleged in the
Statement of Reasons.  
If the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security concerns under the Directive, the burden
4
of persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present  evidence in refutation, extenuation or
mitigation sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within
specific criteria in the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national
security to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based upon trust and confidence.  As required by DoD Directive
5220.6, as amended, at E2.2.2., “any doubt as to whether access to classified information is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the
nation’s security.”
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is forty years old.  The SCA he completed was signed on May 26, 2006
(Item 4), the SOR was issued on August 29, 2006, and the FORM was issued on November
13, 2006.  Applicant responded to the SOR on September 18, 2006, but did not respond to
the FORM, which placed Applicant on specific notice about the Government’s concerns.  His
most recent statements are thus those that appear in his response to the SOR and the
attachments thereto.
Having carefully considered all of the available information in the case file, I conclude
that Applicant’s answers to Questions 21, 22, and 24 are all incorrect and inconsistent with
the documented criminal history, and with his submitted documents, specifically Item 3 at
pages 10, 13, 14, 15, and 29.  His discussion and evaluation of these documents, in the cover
page to his submission (Item 3 at 1) is not supported by the bulk of the evidence of record.
Rather, I conclude, his documents taken together are fairly construed as supportive of the
Government’s position and adverse to that of Applicant.  The language of Questions 21, 22,
and 24 are clearly and succinctly stated.  Applicant’s explanations for why he answered
“No,” as stated by Department Counsel in the FORM, are both inconsistent and illogical.  He
had been “arrested” on the charges alleged ion the SOR and he knew it (Item 3 at 13, 14, 15).
I note in Applicant’s sworn statement to an agent of the Defense Security Service
(DSS) on October 24, 2004 (Item 3), his admission that he was arrested on October 22, 1988
on the charges alleged in 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.  Also in Item 3, Applicant admitted that he was
terminated from his employment, as alleged in 1.d., because of a random drug test result that
was positive for methamphetamines and amphetamines.  Applicant denies he knowing he had
taken any such drugs, although he admits taking two “Yellow Jackets,” which he describes
as “over the counter dietary supplements that works as a stimulant.”  He does nor deny he
was terminated and offers no evidence that the drug tests might have been incorrect.  In such
a case, Applicant clearly should have answered “Yes” and added an explanation, rather than
“No” with no explanation.  
5
PERSONAL CONDUCT: The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information. 
Disqualifying Conditions; (2). The deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire [SF 86], personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; (3) Deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant and material matters to an investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official representative in connection with a
personnel security or trustworthiness determination.
Mitigating Conditions: None that are supported by the record; e.g., (2). The
falsification was not an isolated incident, remains recent, and the individual did not
subsequently provide correct information voluntarily; and (3). The individual did not make
a prompt, good-faith efforts to correct  the falsifications before being confronted with the
facts.
The record evidence establishes that Applicant knew and had reason to know that his
answers were false. Overall, looking at Applicant in the context of the whole person concept,
he has simply not come close to overcoming the evidence supporting the Government’s
concerns, as stated in the SOR.  It is basic to the security clearance adjudication process that
the ultimate burden of proof is on the Applicant to demonstrate that he is eligible for a
security clearance.  The record compels the conclusion that he has simply not demonstrated
he possesses the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of anyone seeking
access to the nation’s secrets.  
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7 of Enclosure 1 of the Directive
are hereby rendered as follows:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)   Against the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.a.           Against the Applicant
                
Subparagraph 1.b.              Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.c.           Against the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.d.            Against the Applicant
6
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to classified
information. 
BARRY M. SAX
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
  
