 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-08144 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Alcohol Consumption and Drug Involvement concerns, as 
she has overcome her alcohol and drug addiction. However, she failed to mitigate the 
Personal Conduct concern, because she falsified her security clearance application by 
deliberately omitting information about her past alcohol and drug problems. Such deceit 
casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct).1 On March 22, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 10, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed. I was assigned the case on April 19, 2012 and, after coordinating with the 
parties, scheduled the hearing for May 23, 2012. At hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant appeared at the hearing, testified, called her supervisor as a witness, and 
offered four character letters, including a letter from her counselor. These documents 
were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on June 5, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in her early forties. She is married and has two young children. She 
has been with her current employer since 2010. Her supervisor, who is a retired U.S. 
military officer and has held a clearance for nearly 30 years, volunteered to testify on 
her behalf and recommends her for a clearance. He states that Applicant is reliable, 
trustworthy, and a self-starter, whose work performance is excellent.2 
 
Applicant started using drugs and alcohol in her teens, around the time her 
parents divorced. Her use of drugs, primarily marijuana and cocaine, gradually 
increased to the point that, by 2002, she was using cocaine on a daily basis. She was 
arrested and charged in 1990 with cocaine possession and, in 1994, with driving while 
under the influence (she also had illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia in her 
possession when she was arrested). Applicant estimates that, at its height, her drug 
habit was costing her about $400 a week. She abused alcohol to help her sleep and 
“come down from the cocaine.”3 
 
On August 3, 2003, Applicant decided to change her life and went to her mother 
for help. They found an inpatient drug and alcohol treatment program, but the program 
would not accept Applicant based solely on her cocaine addiction, so she exaggerated 
her alcohol use and was accepted. Upon entry into the program, Applicant was 
diagnosed with alcohol and cocaine dependency. She successfully completed the 
program and, upon discharge, was diagnosed as cocaine dependent. She received a 
favorable prognosis, and was advised to abstain from using alcohol and illegal drugs. 
She then completed an intensive six-week outpatient treatment program.  
 
Applicant then moved to State A and spent the next five months, from September 
2003 to January 2004, living at a halfway house for recovering addicts. She participated 
in a treatment program at the halfway house and successfully completed it.4  
                                                          
2
 Tr. at 24-25, 40-44; GE 1; AE B. See also AE A.  
 
3
 Tr. at 26-27, 32-33, 39; GE 4, Summary at 2-3; GE 5. 
 
4
 Tr. at 29-30; GE 2 - GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
After leaving the halfway house, Applicant moved back to State B and began 
therapy with an experienced counselor “to find the root of (her) problems.”5 These 
therapy sessions lasted from 2004 to 2007. The counselor writes: 
 
(Applicant) attended sessions weekly and was dedicated to her progress, 
growing and maturing steadily. Her self esteem improved a great deal 
during that time. She terminated treatment when she married and moved 
(to State C). She has maintained contact with me on occasion, keeping 
me updated on her progress in work as well as her personal life. 
(Applicant) demonstrated, at all times, her ability to stay on track in 
pursuing her goals. I experienced her as someone with integrity and 
determination to live a quality life. I can, with confidence, recommend that 
she is qualified to have [a] security clearance.6  
 
Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since August 3, 2003. She does not 
associate with those involved with illegal drugs. She regularly attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings from 2003 to 2004. She stopped drinking alcohol altogether 
for three years following her discharge from the inpatient treatment program and did not 
drink while pregnant with her two children. She now only drinks on social occasions and 
on some weekends, but limits her consumption two to three glasses of wine or beer. 
She does not drink around her children, always has a designated driver when she does 
drink, and has had no derogatory alcohol-related incidents. Her supervisor has 
witnessed Applicant drink at social settings and has never seen her drink to excess. He 
has taken appropriate action in the past when he has witnessed or become aware that a 
subordinate has an alcohol problem. Applicant is dedicated to her family and job.7 
 
Applicant was unemployed from June 2009 to March 2010. She filled out and 
submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2010 in connection with her 
new job, with her current employer. Applicant was required to reveal whether she had 
used any illegal drugs in the past seven years, and whether she had received any 
counseling or treatment for drug or alcohol issues in the preceding seven years in 
response to pertinent questions in the SCA. Applicant answered “no” to these 
questions.8 She also did not list her residency at the halfway house in State A from 
September 2003 to January 2004. Instead, she claimed to have continuously resided, 
from January 2003 to May 2005, in State B at her rental apartment.9 She also did not 
reveal the alcohol and drug-related charges from 1990 and 1994 in response to relevant 
                                                          
5
 Tr. at 31. 
 
6
 AE C. 
 
7
 Tr. at 23, 30-32, 37-39, 43-44; GE 2 - GE 5 
 
8
 GE 1 at 45-46. 
 
9
 GE 1 at 14-15. 
 
 
4 
 
 
questions on the SCA that required disclosure of such information.10 She signed her 
SCA, certifying that her responses were “true, complete, and correct to the best of (her) 
knowledge and belief.”11 
 
Applicant denies that she intentionally omitted any information from her SCA. 
She claims that, when filling out her SCA, she miscalculated the timeframe she was 
using illegal drugs and in treatment. She now acknowledges that she should have 
revealed her illegal drug use, as well as the treatment and counseling she received, in 
response to pertinent questions on the SCA. She continues to maintain that the 
omission of this information was unintentional.12  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. “In analyzing cases before them, judges must be 
guided by common sense and with a view toward making a reasoned determination 
consistent with the interests of national security.”13 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.14 An 
                                                          
10
 GE 1 at 44-45. 
 
11
 GE 1 at 50. Applicant’s certification also includes her understanding “that intentionally 
withholding, misrepresenting, or falsifying information may have a negative effect on my security 
clearance . . . up to and including denial or revocation of my security clearance . . ." 
 
12
 Tr. at 23-24, 33-36; Answer; GE 5. 
 
13
 ISCR Case No. 11-03452 at 5 (App. Bd. June 6, 2012).  
 
14
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”15 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern regarding excessive alcohol consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s excessive alcohol use from her teens to August 2003 raises this 
concern and triggers application of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Furthermore, although Applicant’s exaggeration of her own alcohol use may have 
contributed to her 2003 diagnosis of alcohol dependency, such diagnosis establishes 
                                                          
15
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 22(e), to wit: “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment program.”16 
 
 AG ¶ 23 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the Guideline G 
concern. The following mitigating conditions are potentially raised by the evidence:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant last abused alcohol in 2003. She has successfully completed multiple 
alcohol and drug treatment programs, participated in AA, and was in therapy up to 
2007. She has now started drinking again after a (dated and possibly wrong) diagnosis 
of alcohol dependency. When an applicant has been properly diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent and advised to refrain from using alcohol, abstinence would be highly 
advisable because the resumption of alcohol use under such circumstances raises a 
significant concern. However, the guidelines do not require complete abstinence for all 
time following a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. Instead, an applicant in such 
circumstances must establish “abstention for a period of time sufficient clearly to 
establish that an applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability are not subject to question.”17 
Applicant did not drink alcohol for four years following her discharge from an inpatient 
treatment program – treatment that she voluntarily sought out and completed. She then 
voluntarily went through further treatment and counseling for the next four years. 
Alcohol no longer has the same destructive hold over Applicant as it did nine years ago 
and she can stop drinking at will, as evidenced by her abstinence during two separate 
pregnancies over the past five years. Her current alcohol use is quite limited and done 
                                                          
16
 ISCR Case No. 07-00558 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008) (Application of AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) not 
limited to enumerated professionals). 
 
17
 ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007). 
 
 
7 
 
 
in a responsible fashion. Applicant met her high burden of persuasion and 
demonstrated that her use of alcohol no longer serves as an avenue to question her 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (b) apply in full, while AG 
¶ 23(d) applies in part. Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption concern. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of illegal drug use implicates the above concern, and 
establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
 (a)  any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant’s diagnosis of cocaine dependency, establishes AG ¶ 
25(e), to wit: “evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment program.” 
 
 AG ¶ 26 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the Guideline H 
concern. The following mitigating conditions are potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
(a)  the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b)  a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant has been drug free since August 3, 2003. She successfully completed 
an inpatient drug and alcohol treatment program in August 2003, followed by an 
 
8 
 
 
intensive outpatient treatment program and residency at a halfway house for five 
months where she learned to maintain her drug-free lifestyle. Applicant then entered 
therapy with an experienced counselor from 2004 to 2007. She does not associate with 
those involved with illegal drugs and has been drug free for nearly nine years. In short, 
Applicant’s past drug use no longer casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a), (b), and (d) apply. Applicant mitigated 
the concern raised by her history of illegal drug use.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern, but only AG ¶ 16(a) warrants discussion: 
 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified. 
Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.18 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified her SCA when she failed to disclose her use of 
cocaine and marijuana, and the subsequent treatment she received for her substance 
abuse issues. Applicant’s illegal drug use dates back to when she was a teenager and 
ended on August 3, 2003 – a pivotal date in her life that she would not easily forget or 
confuse. Additionally, the subsequent treatment and counseling Applicant received was 
not even remotely close to being over seven years old at the time she signed her SCA. 
This evidence leaves Applicant’s claim that she miscalculated the dates of her illegal 
drug use and treatment implausible and not credible. Applicant’s true intent is further 
                                                          
18
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
 
9 
 
 
revealed by her failure to disclose on her SCA her residency at the halfway house and 
the past criminal charges related to alcohol and drugs.19 Disclosure of this information 
would have alerted the Government to her substance abuse history, which Applicant 
wanted to keep secret after nine months of unemployment. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the personal conduct concern by establishing one or 
more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17. I have considered all the listed 
mitigating conditions and find that none apply. Applicant continues to maintain that the 
omissions at issue were a result of an honest mistake. Although the information that 
Applicant intentionally omitted from her SCA no longer raises a security concern, she 
did not know, at the time she signed her SCA and certified it was true, that a judge 
would ultimately find in her favor as to the adverse information she failed to disclose. 
Her dishonesty continues to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).20 Applicant overcame years of alcohol and drug 
addiction, and leads a productive life that is centered on her family and work. This 
decision is not intended, nor should it diminish those accomplishments. However, 
Applicant’s dishonesty at the initiation of her background investigation leaves me with 
serious reservations as to her suitability for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:        For Applicant 
                                                          
19
 ISCR Case No. 07-16653 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (uncharged falsification may be 
properly considered by an administrative judge in “assessing an applicant’s credibility”). 
 
20
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.c:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
