1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ADP Case No. 16-03269 
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Brittany C. Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concern, but he did not 
mitigate the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On February 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline C, 
foreign preference, and Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 25, 2017 (Answer), and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
02/11/2019
 
2 
(NOH) on June 22, 2018, scheduling the hearing for July 10, 2018. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. 
 
I appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively, the 
Government’s exhibit list and discovery letter, and its request for administrative notice of 
facts about Egypt. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through I, which were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 19, 2018.             
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel’s request that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Egypt was included in the record as HE II. Applicant did not object. I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in HE II. The facts administratively noticed 
are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.g, denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
2.d, 2.f, and 2.h, and neither admitted nor denied SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.e. He is 52 years 
old. He married in 2001, divorced in 2003, remarried in 2010, and divorced in 2017. He 
has one child, a son who is a minor, from his second marriage.2 
 
 Applicant was born in Egypt. He graduated from high school in Egypt in 1984 and 
he obtained a medical degree from a university in Egypt in 1990. From 1990 to 2000, he 
worked in Egypt as a medical doctor for three hospitals, of which one was a public 
hospital.3 From 1992 to 1993, he performed mandatory service in the Egyptian military.4  
 
 In 2000, Applicant immigrated to the United States. He applied for U.S. 
citizenship in 2001, and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen and obtained a U.S. 
passport in 2008. In the United States, he obtained a language certificate in 2011 and a 
master’s degree in 2016. He has worked as a clinical data specialist for his current 
employer since July 2015. He was first granted eligibility to hold a public trust position in 
May 2016, and he is seeking to maintain his eligibility for access to sensitive 
information.5 
 
                                                          
2 Answer; Tr. at 6-9, 15-18; GE 1; AE E. 
 
3 Applicant obtained a medical certification in the United States in 2002, and he volunteered at various 
hospitals in the United States from around 2000 to 2008; he is not licensed to practice medicine in the 
United States. Tr. at 6-7, 37; AE B, C. 
 
4 Tr. at 6-9, 15-18, 33-42, 46-47; GE 1, 2; AE B, C. 
 
5 Tr. at 6-9, 15-18, 33-42, 46-47; GE 1, 2; AE B, C. 
 
3 
At the time of his 2015 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant had an 
Egyptian passport issued in 2014 that was not scheduled to expire until 2021 (SOR ¶ 
1.a). He indicated that when he traveled to Egypt, he did so on his U.S. passport; upon 
arrival in Egypt, he used his Egyptian passport as identification to show that he was an 
Egyptian citizen, because it was convenient for him to do so. He relinquished his 
Egyptian passport to his facility security officer (FSO) when he received the SOR in 
2017. He testified that he had no intentions of retrieving his Egyptian passport from his 
FSO or obtaining another Egyptian passport in the future.6 
 
Applicant’s second ex-wife is a citizen and resident of Egypt; their son is a dual 
citizen of the United States and Egypt, residing with Applicant’s second ex-wife in Egypt 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b). Applicant married his second ex-wife in Egypt. He sponsored her 
move to the United States, but she never became a U.S. citizen. She returned to Egypt 
in November 2015 with their son, and Applicant testified that he has not since had 
contact with either of them. She works as an accountant for a bank in Egypt. Applicant 
was unaware whether the bank was affiliated with the Egyptian government. Applicant 
testified that she has custody of their son, according to Egyptian law, until he reaches 
age 15, at which point he can choose the parent with whom he wants to live. Applicant 
pays $170 USD monthly in child support, as ordered by an Egyptian court, through a 
money transfer service in which he wires the money to his 54-year-old brother.7 
 
Applicant’s mother, former mother-in-law, four brothers, and sister are citizens 
and residents of Egypt. His former mother-in-law and sister are employed by the 
Egyptian government, and his one brother was formerly employed by the Egyptian 
government (SOR ¶¶ 2.c - 2.g). He has not spoken to his former mother-in-law since his 
2017 divorce. He indicated in his SCA that she worked for the Egyptian government. He 
testified that he visits his family in Egypt approximately once every two to three years, 
and he did so in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014 and 2016. He planned to visit them less 
in the future, and testified that he would do so using his U.S. passport. He testified that 
none of his family in Egypt are aware that he is seeking to maintain his eligibility for 
access to sensitive information, and do not know the nature of his work.8 
 
Applicant’s mother is 79 years old. His 54-year-old brother lives with her. She 
has never worked outside of the home. Applicant’s father was a teacher for the Egyptian 
Department of Education (DOE); he died when Applicant was 14 years old. Applicant’s 
mother has supported herself through Applicant’s father’s pension from the Egyptian 
government. She is diabetic, and she also receives health benefits from the Egyptian 
government. Applicant talks to her by telephone once every two to three weeks, 
primarily about her health. He sees her when he travels to Egypt.9 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 33-42, 80, 93; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 42-46, 71, 92-93; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 47-80; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. at 47-77, 90-92; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 
Applicant’s four brothers are ages 60, 56, 54, and 45. All of them performed 
mandatory service in the Egyptian military. The 60-year-old brother is married with two 
children. He works as a translator in Saudi Arabia, the details of which Applicant was 
unaware. His wife and children continue to live in Egypt. Applicant talks to him once 
every several years. Applicant was unaware whether this brother had any affiliations 
with the Egyptian government or military.10  
 
Applicant’s 56-year-old brother is married with four to five children. He works for 
a hotel in Dubai. Applicant talks to him by telephone once every six months to a year. 
Applicant testified that this brother does not have any affiliations with the Egyptian 
government or military.11 
 
Applicant’s 54-year-old brother is married with two children. This brother lives 
with their mother. He is retired from the Egyptian military and receives a military 
pension. Applicant was unaware whether this brother maintained any contacts in the 
Egyptian military. Applicant testified that this brother was trying to start his own 
business, but Applicant was unaware of further details. Applicant talks to him once 
every month to two.12 
 
Applicant’s 45-year-old brother is married with three children. He used to work for 
the Egyptian DOE. As of Applicant’s Answer, this brother was working in Bahrain as an 
information technology specialist and teacher at a private school. Applicant did not 
believe this brother had any current affiliations with the Egyptian government or military. 
This brother’s wife and children continue to live in Egypt. Applicant talks to this brother 
two to three times yearly. Applicant sent him $400 in around early 2018, because this 
brother told him that work was not going well and he needed to send money to his 
family in Egypt.13 
 
Applicant’s sister is 50 years old. She is married with five children. She works as 
a teacher for the Egyptian DOE. Her husband owns a pharmacy. Applicant did not 
believe her husband was affiliated with the Egyptian government or military. Applicant 
talks to her by telephone once every three to four months.14 
 
Applicant’s fifth brother, age 57, is a dual citizen of Egypt and the United States, 
and has resided in the United States since approximately 1990. He is married with four 
children; all are U.S. citizens. He works in media. Applicant talks and sees this brother 
often. This brother occasionally sends money to their mother.15 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 47-77, 87-89; GE 1, 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 47-77; GE 1, 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 47-77, 86-87; GE 1, 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 47-77, 85; GE 1, 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 47-77, 85-86; GE 1. 
 
15 Tr. at 49-51, 88-91; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 
From 2008 to 2016, Applicant owned an apartment in Egypt; its value as of his 
SCA was approximately $40,000 USD (SOR ¶ 2.h). With help from his mother and 
siblings, he purchased it for approximately $10,000 USD from his 60-year-old brother, 
with the idea that he would use it with his family when he traveled to Egypt. He sold it 
for $25,000 USD to a distant relative, and he gave all of the proceeds to his family in 
Egypt. At the time of his SCA, he also had a bank account in Egypt. He opened it with 
$200 USD between 2012 and 2014. He had returned to Egypt to live, while working as a 
medical interpreter for a U.S. company and completing his master’s degree, to spend 
time with his then-wife and son and complete their paperwork to immigrate to the United 
States. He opened the account in the event he needed to transfer money to the United 
States. He testified that he never used it. He does not own any other foreign property or 
have any other foreign financial interests. He testified that he does not stand to own his 
mother’s property in Egypt, which will likely be inherited by his siblings who live there.16  
 
As of the date of the hearing, Applicant’s annual salary was approximately 
$53,000. He was renting a room in the United States since 2016, in the home of a friend 
who was also a prior roommate from 2006. He has leased a car for three years and 
planned to buy it. He has a bank account in the United States with a balance of 
approximately $1,800. He has a retirement account with a balance of approximately 
$13,000. He does not have any other assets in the United States. He was not affiliated 
with any foreign governments. He has received annual security training. He testified that 
he would report any attempts to blackmail or his family to his FSO.17 
 
A friend of Applicant since obtaining their certification together in 2011 testified 
that Applicant is a solid and trustworthy man. Another friend, was Applicant’s former 
roommate in 2006 and is Applicant’s current landlord, held a public trust position as of 
the date of the hearing. The witness testified that he met Applicant’s brother in the 
United States on at least two occasions, and he previously met Applicant’s ex-wife and 
child. He testified that he did not believe Applicant to be a threat to the United States, 
and described Applicant as a trustworthy man. Applicant’s supervisor since March 2017 
stated that Applicant was a responsible caretaker of sensitive information and an asset 
to the team. She rated him favorably in his 2016 to 2017 performance evaluation. Other 
character references described Applicant as a dedicated, compassionate, and honest 
individual.18 
 
Egypt 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens of threats from terrorist 
groups in Egypt, and to consider the risks of travel to the country. A number of terrorist 
groups, including the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) have committed multiple 
deadly attacks in Egypt. U.S. diplomatic personnel are prohibited from travel in parts of 
Egypt, and U.S. citizens are warned to avoid those areas. 
                                                          
16 Tr. at 41-77, 80-85, 93-94; GE 1, 2; AE D. 
 
17 Tr. at 41-78, 80-85; GE 1; AE G, H, I. 
 
18 Tr. at 94-108; AE F, G. 
 
6 
 Significant human rights problems in Egypt include excessive use of force by 
security forces; deficiencies in due process; and the suppression of civil liberties, 
including societal and government restrictions on freedoms of expression and the 
press, and the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association. Political protests occur 
without warning in Egypt. Demonstrations have led to frequent violent clashes between 
police and protestors, resulting in deaths, injuries, and property damage. 
 
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security. AG ¶ 2.b.   
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The trustworthiness concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns   
under AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with 
U.S. national security interests; and 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law. 
 
Applicant is an Egyptian citizen by virtue of being born there. There is no 
evidence that he failed to report or disclose to an appropriate security official his 
possession of an Egyptian passport, or that he failed to use his U.S. passport when 
entering or exiting the United States. He disclosed his Egyptian citizenship and passport 
on his SCA and during his background interviews. He indicated that he traveled to 
 
8 
Egypt on his U.S. passport, and he only presented his Egyptian passport upon arrival 
out of convenience, as identification that he was an Egyptian citizen. He surrendered his 
Egyptian passport to his FSO upon receipt of the SOR. There is no evidence that he 
participated in any foreign activities, or that he used his Egyptian citizenship to protect 
his financial interests in Egypt in violation of U.S. law. He sold his property there in 
2016, and he credibly testified that he has not used his Egyptian bank account since he 
opened it between 2012 and 2014. None of the potentially disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 10 are established, and I find SOR ¶ 1.a in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The trustworthiness concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a trustworthiness concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a trustworthiness concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns   
under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant sold his property in Egypt in 2016. He credibly testified that he has not 
used his Egyptian bank account since he opened it between 2012 and 2014. AG ¶ 7(f) 
is not established, and I find SOR ¶ 2.h in Applicant’s favor. 
 
9 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The 
United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding sensitive 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 19, 2004). Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with t h e  United States over matters they view as important to their 
vital interests or national security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at 
**15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the 
United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk 
of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has 
an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon 
the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Applicant has not spoken to his mother-in-
law since he divorced his second wife in 2017. In addition, his one brother was also no 
longer employed by the Egyptian government as of the date of the hearing.  AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) are not established as to SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.f, and I find SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.f in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant’s mother, one brother, sister, second ex-wife, and son, are citizens and 
residents of Egypt. His sister is employed by the Egyptian government. His three other 
brothers who are citizens of Egypt and resided in Egypt at the time of the SOR, no longer 
resided there as of the date of the hearing; though the wives and children for at least two 
of these three brothers did. While Applicant divorced his second wife in 2017, she is the 
mother of their minor son. Though he indicated that he has not had contact with either 
his second wife or their son since 2015, he provides monthly financial support for his 
son. Terrorist activities and significant human rights abuses are present in Egypt. 
Applicant’s foreign contacts in Egypt create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence as to SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 
2.c, 2.e, and 2.g. 
 
 
 
10 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion 
of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 8(c) is also not established, as Applicant visited his 
family in Egypt once every year to two between 2009 and 2016. He communicates with 
his mother once every two to three weeks. He communicates with his brother and sister 
who reside in Egypt once every month to four months. He provided financial support to 
his one brother in 2018, so that this brother could support his wife and children in Egypt. 
As previously discussed, though he divorced his second wife in 2017 and indicated that 
he has not had contact with either her or their minor son since 2015, he provides 
monthly financial support for his son.  
 
Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 2000. He received a 
language certificate and a master’s degree in the United States. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. Though he has a bank account in Egypt, he stated that 
he has not used it since he opened it between 2012 and 2014, and he sold his property 
in Egypt in 2016. His financial interests in the United States, on the other hand, include 
his annual salary of $53,000, and his retirement and bank accounts totaling 
approximately $14,800. These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, 
Applicant’s ties to his family in Egypt are equally as strong. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden to demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
11 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under both 
guidelines, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concerns, but 
he has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his ex-wife, son, mother, 
one brother, and sister in Egypt. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant him eligibility for 
access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.h:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
