1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE        
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS          
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04278 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns arising from his 
connections to family members in Nigeria. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
History of Case 
On June 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 30, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). On February 
12, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a hearing (Answer).The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 4, 
2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 9, 2018, setting the hearing for 
November 5, 2018. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified and called one witness. He did not 
offer any exhibits. The Government’s exhibits were admitted without objection. The record 
02/28/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
closed at the conclusion of the hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 13, 2018.  
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
I take administrative notice of facts concerning Nigeria. Those facts are set out in 
the Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for the Federal Republic of Nigeria 
(GE 4). The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and 
matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The pertinent facts are set out in the Findings 
of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four allegations contained in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact below. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and unmarried. He was born in Nigeria. He attended 
college in Nigeria, but did not complete a degree. In September 2008, at the age of 23, 
he immigrated to the United States on a lottery visa. Upon his arrival, he lived with a friend 
for two years. From August 2009 to May 2013, he attended college and earned a 
bachelor’s degree. He was unemployed for a period of time while he attended college. 
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2014. He worked for a security 
company prior to obtaining a position with a defense company in 2015. He began 
graduate school in 2018. (Tr. 21-25; GE 2) 
 
 Applicant visited Nigeria in 2013 to attend his brother’s wedding and see his family. 
He returned to Nigeria in April 2016 to see his parents, who were ill. In December 2016, 
he went back to Nigeria because his father was not doing well and he thought his father 
might die. Both parents recovered. They are citizens and residents of Nigeria. (Tr. 25-26) 
 
 Applicant’s mother retired from a government position. She was a secret service 
officer. She also has owned a small convenience store for many years. Applicant and his 
brothers worked in the store while they were growing up. Applicant’s father is retired. He 
worked as a quarry manager. He also did commercial driving. (Tr. 27-30; GE 2) In April 
2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part of a background 
investigation. Applicant stated that he texted his father every three weeks and his mother 
every two weeks. (GE 3).  
 
 Applicant has four brothers. All of them are citizens of Nigeria; three of them are 
also residents of Nigeria. One brother worked for the Nigerian government’s security 
services. He provided escort security for a president of Nigeria. Applicant said that brother 
left that position about two years ago and now owns a business. Another brother works 
for a university doing administrative work and another brother owns an entertainment 
center. His fourth brother is a resident of Canada since 2002. He works for an insurance 
company located there. (Tr. 30-35; Answer) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 During the April 2017 background interview, Applicant stated that he contacts his 
brother residing in Canada once every two weeks through text messages. He contacts 
one brother in Nigeria once a month by text. He contacts his other two brothers in Nigeria 
by phone and text messages once every three weeks. (GE 3) Applicant testified that he 
speaks to his family once or twice a month, but he never talks about his work and does 
not ask about their work. (Tr. 33) 
 
 Since 2010, Applicant has given his parents about $500 for medical expenses. The 
last time was two years ago. He said his brothers help his parents financially. (Tr. 36, 39-
40, 48)  
 
 Applicant said most of the terrorist problems in Nigeria occur in the northern part 
of the country. He said his family lives in the western area, which is between 300 and 500 
miles away. He has never been to northern Nigeria. (Tr. 37-40)  
 
 Applicant owns a car and has a U.S. checking account and credit card. He does 
not have any financial interests in Nigeria. He does not have any relatives in the United 
States. He is active in his church. (Tr. 44-46)    
  
 Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) testified. In addition to being the FSO for 
Applicant’s employer, he also works in the human resources department. The FSO has 
known Applicant since 2015. He said Applicant is a top database specialist and has 
received high performance ratings, which indicate that he exceeds expectations. (Tr. 50-
53) 
  
Nigeria  
 
 Nigeria faces many challenges fueled by sectarian, religious, and ethnic violence. 
Numerous terrorist groups are increasingly active throughout Nigeria. Threats of 
kidnapping and violence are high, and the Department of State warns U.S. citizens that 
all travel to Nigeria should be avoided. Of particular significance are the poor human rights 
record; the active and hostile presence of Boko Haram and ISIS; and other insurgent and 
extremist groups that generate instability and openly attack police, security and military 
forces, the local populace, and U.S. citizens and interests. 
  
Policies 
 
This national security eligibility action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD after June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
 
 
 
4 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology.  
 
Nigeria has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly 
and contrary to U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant’s close connections and visits to his 
family there generate significantly heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
Applicant has ongoing contacts with his parents and three brothers, who are 
citizens and residents of Nigeria. He visited his family in 2013 and twice in 2016. He has 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
provided some financial support to his parents. These relationships create a heightened 
risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists and insurgents in 
Nigeria seek intelligence and engage in behaviors that are hostile to the United States’ 
interests. Applicant’s relationship with family members creates a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and 
his desire to help family members living in Nigeria. The evidence is sufficient to raise a 
disqualification under AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
  After the Government produced sufficient evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on these facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Considered in light of the substantial anti-western insurgent and terrorism threats 
in Nigeria, Applicant did not sufficiently demonstrate that it is unlikely he could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or 
government and those of the United States due to his family ties in Nigeria. He has 
legitimate and appropriately close relationships with family members living in Nigeria, and 
a strong interest in protecting those people. His communication and contact with them 
are neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, he failed to establish the mitigating 
conditions set out in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c). 
 
The evidence also fails to establish sufficient mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). A key 
factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States.” Applicant has minimal connections to the United States: 
he arrived in the United States in 2008; he earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009; he 
became a citizen in September 2014, less than five years ago; and he started working for 
a defense contractor in 2015. These connections do not outweigh his history and familial 
relationships with Nigeria. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s U.S. 
 
 
 
 
7 
ties are so deep and longstanding that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interests involving his family in Nigeria in favor of the U.S. interests. Accordingly, he did 
not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under this condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B and in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The foreign influence security concerns do not arise from any questionable 
conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that are normal results of his family 
situation. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. However, after weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all pertinent facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole-person, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns pertaining to 
foreign influence. The significant potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
remains unmitigated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                        
         
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
