 1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03836 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision  
______________ 
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has provided sufficient mitigating evidence to overcome his failure to 
file his Federal and state tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2012. Eligibility for 
security clearance access is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On December 15, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for security clearance eligibility so that he could work 
for a defense contractor. On July 31, 2017, he provided interrogatory answers and 
attached information. In the exhibit, Applicant provided explanations for his Federal tax 
problems, and also provided Federal tax return and account transcripts for several tax 
years. On December 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
necessary affirmative finding to grant Applicant’s security clearance and issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him detailing security reasons under the financial 
considerations guideline (Guideline F). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
02/26/2019
 
  2 
 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017.   
  
Applicant provided his notarized answer to the SOR on January 17, 2018. The 
case was assigned to me July 20, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 6, 2018, scheduling the hearing on 
September 13, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government’s two 
exhibits (GE) 1 and 3 were admitted in evidence. Applicant offered no exhibits to be 
admitted into evidence. The record remained open until September 28, 2018, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit post-hearing exhibits. He was granted two 
extensions to submit post-hearing exhibits. No exhibits were received by November 7, 
2018, the final deadline for submitting additional evidence. The exchange of post-
hearing emails between the parties have been marked and entered into evidence as 
Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 24, 2018. 
The record in this case closed on November 7, 2018.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
 At the beginning of the hearing, I asked Applicant why he did not bring the 
Government’s correspondence to the hearing. Applicant’s answer was that he was not 
certain what documents he was supposed to bring to the hearing. (Tr. 6) To determine 
whether Applicant had received copies of the proposed Government exhibits in advance 
of the hearing, Department Counsel asked him whether he recognized the proposed 
Government exhibits. He recognized GE 1 (December 2015 e-QIP) and GE 3 (July 
2017 answers to interrogatories). Because Applicant did not recall receiving GE 2, his 
February 2016 personal subject interview (PSI), Department Counsel moved to 
withdraw the exhibit. The motion was granted. (Tr. 18-19)  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
The SOR contains one allegation that Applicant did not file his Federal and state 
tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2012. Applicant admitted that he failed to file the 
returns and explained that when employed by a fast food restaurant in 2009, his 
employer inserted an incorrect social security number (SSN) for Applicant on his W-2 
form and their personnel employment system records.  
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and single. He has a four-year-old daughter. He and the 
daughter’s mother (former girlfriend) each have 50% custodial rights of the child. He has 
been working as a helpdesk administrator since April 2017. Before his current job, he 
was employed for about 18 months as a field technician for a public school system. 
After graduating from high school, Applicant received three computer certifications 
between 2011 and 2013. Those certifications were in computer knowledge, networking 
and security. This security clearance application is Applicant’s second. In 2012, he was 
 
  3 
 
sponsored for a security clearance, but his interim clearance was denied for unknown 
reasons. (GE 1 at 11-30, 46; Tr. 6-13, 33) 
 
 Applicant’s tax problems started in tax year 2009, when his first employer, a fast 
food operation, entered an incorrect SSN on his W-2 form, a document that an employer 
must send to an employee and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) at the end of the tax 
year. Two days before Applicant (19 years old at the time) was required to file the 2009 
Federal tax return (April 2010), he discovered the W-2 form had the wrong SSN. He 
filed for an extension, but did not file a return for 2009. He tried unsuccessfully to 
contact his employer’s corporate offices. Then, Applicant informed his general manager 
who responded that the SSN would be corrected. (GE 1 at 25-30; Tr. 22-24) 
 
 Later in 2010, Applicant received another W-2 form with a corrected SSN. He 
spoke with a family friend who told him that he could not file for the current tax year 
unless he had filed for the previous tax year. Nonetheless, he filed for an extension for 
2010 (April 2011) as he had done for 2009. However, he did not file the 2010, 2011, or 
2012 Federal and state tax returns because he was still guided by the notion that he 
could not file for current tax years unless he had filed for previous tax years. He 
remembered saving the W-2 forms for 2009 through 2012 tax years and intended to file 
the Federal tax returns. Even though he had the corrected W-2 forms, he could not 
furnish a reason for not filing the federal tax returns. He eventually lost the 2009 through 
2012 W-2 forms. Applicant claimed that after he was told in 2013 he could file for 
current tax years even though he had not filed for previous years, he filed his Federal 
and state tax returns for all subsequent years. Applicant submitted proof that he filed 
Federal returns for tax years 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. There is no evidence that 
Applicant owes any Federal or state taxes for any tax year. (Answer to SOR; GE 3 at 
18-26; Tr. 24-29) 
 
 In an effort to recover his W-2 forms for the missing Federal tax years, Applicant 
tried to contact his previous employers, but received little cooperation from them, and in 
some instances his phone calls were never returned. He claimed that he contacted the 
IRS, but had no success. He entered the IRS website and obtained the tax transcripts 
(GE 3), but only for the years he filed returns. He has been unable to speak with an IRS 
representative because of his work hours. (Tr.29-31) 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing documentation consists of emails explaining his efforts 
to obtain the necessary Federal and state tax documentation. On September 17, 2018, 
four days after the hearing (September 13, 2018), Applicant reported that he obtained 
the state tax returns from 2013 to the present and would be submitting them at a later 
time. Regarding the missing W-2 forms, a tax preparer service informed him that he 
would have to fill out an application with the IRS. Then, it would take up to 10 days for 
the IRS to send him the IRS income tax reports. Applicant did not believe he would be 
able to retrieve the pertinent documents by the September 28, 2018 deadline for 
submitting post-hearing documents. (AE A at 1) 
 
  4 
 
 On September 18, 2018, Applicant indicated that that he had applied for a 
personal identification number (PIN) with the IRS. He estimated that it would take up to 
two weeks from September 18, 2018 (beyond the post-hearing deadline) to receive the 
PIN and consult with the tax preparer service to process the return. He inquired whether 
he should copy and submit the complete state tax returns or just the first page of the 
return showing the stamp of the state tax agency. On September 25, 2018, Department 
Counsel indicated no objection to an extension of the September 28, 2018 deadline for 
submission of post-hearing documents. On September 26, 2018, I granted an extension 
of the deadline to October 17, 2018. (AE A) 
 
 On October 16, 2018, Applicant provided an update of the difficulties confronted 
in obtaining his W-2 forms so that he could file his tax returns. First, he was unable to 
get the W-2 forms from most of his previous employers. He obtained the income reports 
from the IRS, but they do not contain earned income numbers (EIN) for previous 
employers and state tax withholding information. One state tax agency in which he was 
previously employed advised him that they do not retain state tax withholding 
information. The agency informed him that he would have to submit an application with 
the Social Security Administration (SSA) to receive the missing W-2 forms. According to 
the form, it would take up to six weeks to receive copies of the W-2 forms. Then, he 
would provide W-2 forms and income reports to his tax preparation service for 
processing. Applicant requested another extension of deadline. On October 17, 2018, 
Applicant’s request for an extension was granted until November 7, 2018. No 
documentation was presented. (AE A)  
 
Policies  
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. These guidelines, which are flexible rules of law, are applied together with 
common sense and the general factors of the whole-person concept. The protection of 
the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(d) requires that “[a]ny 
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be 
resolved in favor of the national security.”   
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision.  
 
 
 
 
  5 
 
 
Analysis  
 
Financial Considerations  
 
AG ¶ 18. Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
AG ¶ 19. The disqualifying condition relevant in this case is:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 When he was 19 years old (2009), Applicant was working at a fast food 
restaurant. Through no fault of his own, his employer entered an incorrect SSN for 
Applicant on his W-2 form and its personnel employment records system. He did not 
discover the SSN error until two days before the 2010 deadline for filing his 2009 federal 
tax return. He received an extension to file his 2009 tax return, but did not file the return. 
He received a new W-2 form with a corrected SSN before the deadline for filing his 
2010 tax return. However, he believed he could not file for the current tax year unless 
he filed for the previous tax year. Though he received an extension to file his 2010 
Federal tax return, he did not file the return. He did not file his federal tax returns for 
2011 and 2012, even though he had corrected W-2 forms for 2009 through 2012. 
Failure to file his Federal and state tax returns suggests that Applicant may not have the 
judgment necessary for complying with well-established government rules that are 
essential for safeguarding classified information. AG ¶ 19(f) apples.  
 
 AG ¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  
 
 
  6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a nonprofit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 I find the foregoing mitigating conditions apply. When Applicant received the 
corrected W-2 forms in 2011, he exercised poor judgment in not immediately filing his 
Federal and state tax returns. However, after conversing with a tax filer in 2013 who 
informed him that he could file returns for the current tax year even though he did not 
file for previous years, he filed his 2013 Federal tax return, and has continued to file all 
Federal and state tax returns since. Initiating his legal obligation to file his tax returns in 
2014 (2013 tax year) demonstrates that his failure to file the tax returns between 2009 
through 2012 is unlikely to recur, and no longer raises doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 While there is no evidence that Applicant received counseling on tax issues until 
September 2018, he received informal advice in 2011 from a family friend and in 2013 
from another tax filer. The information he received in 2011 was untrue. On the other 
hand, he received truthful advice two years later persuading him to exercise good 
judgment in filing his 2013 tax return, even though he had not filed returns for previous 
years. In his detailed post-hearing emails, he has received ongoing guidance from the 
tax preparation service and the Federal and state tax agencies on acquiring his W-2 
forms, IRS income reports, and state tax withholding information. Based on the steps 
Applicant has taken thus far to file the missing Federal and state tax returns, I am 
confident he will obtain the missing tax information that will enable him to file his Federal 
and state tax returns in a reasonable period time. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. AG ¶ 20(g) does 
not apply because Applicant’s earnings during the period were probably insufficient to 
require him to file tax returns. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept  
 
I have examined the evidence under the guideline for financial considerations in 
the context of the nine general factors of the whole-person concept listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
  7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 According to his December 2015 e-QIP, Applicant began his employment career 
in 2009 as a fast food worker. In 2011, 2012, and 2013, he earned three computer 
certificates in knowledge, networking, and security. In October 2015, he put his 
computer knowledge to use as a field technician repairing a public school’s system 
computers. In April 2017, he continued to apply his computer knowledge as a help desk 
administrator for a computer contractor. In his December 2015 e-QIP, his July 2017 
answers to interrogatories, his January 2018 answer to the SOR, and at the hearing, 
Applicant provided a consistently credible explanation of how he encountered tax 
issues.  
 
 In his post-hearing emails in September and October 2018, Applicant provided 
information in persuasive detail of his ongoing efforts to acquire the missing W-2 forms 
so that he can file the 2009 through 2012 Federal and state tax returns. Though 
procrastination was a major reason why he did not file the missing tax returns in the 
past, he was much younger when he was working in his first job at the fast food 
restaurant in 2009. In addition to not being sufficiently knowledgeable about tax issues, 
Applicant was not prepared for his employer entering the wrong SSN on his W-2 form. 
After receiving correct information in 2013 that he could file returns for the current tax 
year even though he had not filed returns for previous tax years, Applicant has filed tax 
returns for all subsequent years. Having considered the entire record from an overall 
common-sense point of view, Applicant’s irresponsibility in not filing his Federal and 
state tax returns for four years from 2009 through 2012 is mitigated by the corrective 
action he is taking to file the missing returns. His conduct convinces me that he will 
consistently file all tax returns in the future.  
 
Formal Findings  
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
  8 
 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:       FOR APPLICANT  
    
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion  
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________ 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
