1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-02415 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 2, 2017, and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
(NOH) on June 22, 2018, scheduling the hearing for July 18, 2018. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. 
02/13/2019
 
2 
 
 I appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively, the 
Government’s discovery letter and exhibit list. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted in evidence 
without objection.  
 
At Applicant’s request, I held the record open until August 1, 2018, for the receipt 
of additional evidence. Applicant timely provided additional evidence, which I marked as 
AE D and admitted in evidence without objection. I marked Department Counsel’s 
email, in which she indicated no objection to Applicant’s additional evidence, as HE III. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 26, 2018.                                                                 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and denied SOR ¶ 1.c. 
She is 47 years old. She married in 1997 and divorced in 2014. She has two adult 
children.1 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1989. She then enlisted in the U.S. 
military and honorably retired in 2009. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2016. She 
has worked for various defense contractors since 2009. She has worked for her current 
employer, a defense contractor, since approximately 2015. She was first granted a 
security clearance in approximately 1991.2  
 
 Applicant started consuming alcohol at age 18, after she enlisted in the U.S. 
military. She acknowledged that she drank to excess, at times, from age 18 to 24. She 
binge drank approximately eight to nine beers twice weekly on the weekends. From age 
24 to 39, she drank three to four beers or shared a bottle of wine with her then-husband 
once weekly.3 
 
 In December 2011, Applicant was charged and convicted of driving while 
intoxicated (DWI) 1st offense (SOR ¶ 1.a). This was her first alcohol-related offense. 
She went to a friend’s retirement party and had two glasses of wine. She learned later 
that because the wine she consumed was homemade, it had a higher alcohol content 
than store-bought wine. She did not feel impaired. On her way home, she picked up a 
friend at a nearby bar who asked her for a ride. She was pulled over as she was 
dropping her friend off at his home. When the police asked her if she had been drinking, 
she replied “Yes.” She was administered a breathalyzer and her blood alcohol content 
(BAC) was .10%. She was sentenced to 60 days suspended, driver’s license restriction 
                                                     
1 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 6, 22, 36-38; GE 1. 
  
2 Tr. at 5-8, 20-21, 59-72; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-23, 38-40, 50-51; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
for six months, ordered to complete a 20-hour safe driving course, and fined $450. She 
complied with the court’s sentence.4   
 
 In October 2013, Applicant was charged and convicted of DWI 2nd offense (SOR 
¶ 1.b). This was her second alcohol-related offense and the last time she drove after 
drinking. After work that day, she went directly to class. She and several classmates 
grabbed drinks at a bar across the street after class. She had three beers. She last ate 
at noon. She was tired but she did not feel impaired. She was pulled over about one 
mile from home. The police officer told her that she was driving erratically, and she 
replied “Yes” when asked if she had been drinking. She was administered a 
breathalyzer and her BAC was .11%.5  
 
 Applicant was sentenced to 180 days with 150 suspended; probation for three 
years; suspended driver’s license for four months, then driver’s license restriction for 
three years with an interlock device installed on her car for six months; ordered to 
attend alcohol counseling and Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and abstain from alcohol; 
and fined $700. She complied with the court’s sentence. She served 15 days in jail; she 
successfully completed probation; she did not consume any alcohol during her three-
year probation period; and she attended counseling once monthly and two AA meetings 
weekly for 36 weeks. She did not receive an alcohol diagnosis, but learned through 
counseling how to handle her tendency to make decisions impulsively and how to 
exercise mindfulness.6 
 
 In March 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with probation violation, due 
to an alcohol reading registering on the interlock device installed on her car (SOR ¶ 
1.c). She denied that she consumed alcohol in violation of her probation. She testified 
that she appeared in court to fight the charge, was found not guilty, and the court 
ordered the removal of the interlock device, which was done in July 2015. She believed 
that a court record reflecting that she was found guilty of the violation was an error. The 
same record reflected that she did not receive a sentence from the court in connection 
with this offense. She provided a copy of another court record reflecting that she was 
found not guilty for the same offense, and the court ordered the removal of the interlock 
device in June 2015.7  
 
 Applicant testified that she resumed consuming alcohol in November 2016, when 
she had a glass of wine with Thanksgiving dinner. She consumes one drink once 
monthly, and testified that she does not have a compulsion to drink more. She has no 
future intentions of driving after drinking. On the occasions where she knows she will 
have a drink and have to get home, she plans ahead and arranges for alternate 
transportation. She attributed her heavy drinking in 2011 and 2013 to adjusting to life 
                                                     
4 Tr. at 21-23, 38-40, 50-51; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 23-31, 34-35, 38, 40-49, 51; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE A, B. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-31, 34-35, 38, 40-49, 51; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-34, 51-58; GE 2, 4, 5; AE D. 
 
4 
 
after military retirement, her 2010 separation, and her subsequent divorce, while 
simultaneously working and attending school. She testified, though, that she never felt 
she abused alcohol, and her alcohol use did not negatively factor into her previous 
marriage. She testified that other than a 2013 speeding ticket, her driving record is 
clean.8 
 
 Applicant indicated that her two DUIs are common knowledge. She testified that 
she told her witness and her character reference about her DUIs. Her witness was her 
team supervisor since 2015. He testified that he was aware that Applicant had at least 
one DUI. He had never witnessed Applicant report to work under the influence of 
alcohol. He had occasions to observe her consume alcohol and did not witness her 
consume irresponsibly. He also relied on her to serve as a designated driver for a fellow 
team member several times between 2015 and 2018. He described Applicant as one of 
his best analysts on a team of 23, and an exceptional worker. Her character reference 
was her direct supervisor since March 2017. He wrote that he was “extremely 
impressed by [Applicant’s] work ethic and reliability,” and described her as a trustworthy 
individual.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                     
8 Tr. at 22-30, 38, 42-45, 48-49, 51; GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 35-36, 56-72; GE 2; AE C. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 22. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 Applicant has a pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents.  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are applicable. Applicant denied that she consumed 
alcohol in March 2015, in violation of her probation from her 2013 DWI conviction. She 
provided a court record to corroborate her testimony that she was found not guilty of the 
offense, and that the court ordered the removal of the ignition interlock device installed 
as a result of the underlying DWI conviction. AG ¶ 22(g) has not been established. 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption and two DWI convictions occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. She was adjusting to life after military 
retirement, her 2010 separation, and her subsequent divorce, and simultaneously 
working and attending school. She complied with the court’s sentence for both 
convictions, to include counseling once monthly for 36 weeks after her 2013 DWI 
conviction. Through such counseling, she learned how to handle her tendency to make 
decisions impulsively and how to exercise mindfulness.  
 
 Since Applicant began consuming alcohol again in November 2016, she 
consumes one drink once monthly, and she testified that she does not have a 
compulsion to drink more. She has no future intentions of driving after drinking. On the 
occasions where she knows she will have a drink and have to get home, she plans 
ahead and arranges for alternate transportation. Her witness testified that he has relied 
on her to act as a designated driver for a fellow team member several times between 
2015 and 2018. I find that her two DWIs are not recent, are mitigated by the passage of 
time, and do not continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. She has also demonstrated a clear pattern of modified consumption. AG ¶¶ 
23(a) and 23(b) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
