1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03972 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 8, 2016. On 
December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 Applicant responded to the SOR on February 21, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2018. 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
02/26/2019
 
2 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 
1, 2018, and the hearing was convened on August 29, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 9 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified. The record was held open so 
that Applicant could submit additional evidence. She submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 7, 2018. 
 
During testimony, Applicant admitted that she failed to file Federal and state 
income tax returns since about 2013. On motion by Department Counsel, the SOR was 
amended to add SOR ¶ 1.s, to conform to the evidence regarding her failure to file Federal 
and state income tax returns for tax years 2013 to 2017. Applicant did not object to the 
amendment, and was provided additional time after the hearing to provide supplemental 
documentary evidence in mitigation. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior electrical engineer, employed by a defense 
contractor since 2003. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999 and a master’s degree in 
2006. She married in 1995 and divorced in 2011. She remarried in 2012. She has four 
children, the youngest of whom is living with her. She has held a security clearance since 
2007. 
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling over $31,000, a deed relinquished 
in lieu of foreclosure, and a 2006 bankruptcy discharge. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.r.) SOR ¶ 1.s 
alleges Applicant’s failure to file Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2013 
to 2017. The record evidence is sufficient to establish the SOR allegations. 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, but for SOR 
¶ 1.h, a timeshare deed in lieu of foreclosure allegation, stating that it was part of her 
divorce and was settled and paid. Applicant provided post-hearing evidence of resolution 
of this allegation. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.s during testimony. 
 
While married to her first spouse, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in 2005, 
which resulted in the discharge of nearly $80,000 in debts in 2006. Applicant accumulated 
debts from a business venture from 2001 to 2005, and defaulted on other debts and credit 
cards. The largest SOR debt is an $18,734 new car loan from 2011 that became 
delinquent in 2012 after Applicant had an accident and stopped paying. (SOR ¶ 1.a) Since 
she was uninsured and could not afford the repairs, she abandoned the car with the auto 
dealer. This debt remains unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i are duplicate debts for $2,876, for damage to a rental property. 
Applicant paid the collection company (SOR ¶ 1.i) in May 2018, and provided evidence 
in her post-hearing submission. These allegations are resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a collection account for a credit card that is past due in the amount 
of $896. Applicant testified that it was unpaid, and that she had not contacted the creditor 
 
3 
 
or collection agent. In her post-hearing submission, she stated that intends to dispute the 
amount owed with the assistance of a second credit repair company. This debt remains 
unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d - 1.f,2 1.l - 1.n, and 1.p - 1.q, are medical debts. Applicant testified that 
none of the debts were resolved. However, in her post-hearing submission, she provided 
evidence of payments or partial payments toward the medical debts. They are now 
resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a 2009 judgment for $3,184 from an appliance and furniture company 
that has not been paid. Applicant testified that she has not resolved the debt. In her post-
hearing submission, Applicant stated that she was advised by a credit repair attorney that 
although the judgment is current, she should not make efforts to pay it so that it does not 
reappear on her credit report. However, the debt stays in the public record for 20 years. 
This debt is unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is a cable company debt for $600 on an item that was returned but not 
accounted for by the company. The debt also appears as SOR ¶ 1.o. Applicant disputed 
the debt and was issued a lost equipment ticket. She stated that after 30 days, the 
equipment will be considered permanently lost and the charge will be removed. SOR ¶ 
1.k is a credit card account for $290 placed for collection. In her post-hearing submission, 
Applicant stated the account has been paid in full. These debts are resolved. 
 
During testimony, Applicant stated that after her divorce in 2011, she believed that 
she filed her 2012 Federal income tax return, and sent in a check for $13,000 in taxes. 
The IRS notified her that they could not match the check with a tax return. Applicant stated 
that she mailed in a copy of the return, but continued to receive letters from the IRS. This 
incident caused her to lose confidence in her ability to file tax returns, so Federal returns 
after 2012 were not filed. Regarding state returns, Applicant claimed that she filed her 
2013 tax return in another state, but has not filed any other state returns. She testified 
that she hired an accountant to file all tax returns owed, however she did not provide 
evidence of additional tax return filings or the current status of her efforts to resolve SOR 
¶ 1.s in her post-hearing submission. SOR ¶ 1.s remains unresolved. In testimony, 
Applicant also admitted that she did not report her failure to file tax returns on her 2016 
SCA. 
 
Applicant’s gross income is $178,000. She testified that she had $2,500 in bank 
accounts and about $90,000 in a 401K retirement account. She borrowed about $30,000 
from the 401K, and owes $9,000. Her spouse restarted a bath and beauty product 
business at home, and earned about $8,000 in 2017 and $20,000 in 2018. Their business 
inventory is worth $15,000 - $18,000. Applicant testified that she needed to learn to be 
responsible and manage her debts, and had never had formal credit counseling. She 
acknowledged in her post-hearing submission that her hearing was a “wake up call,” and 
that she was ashamed that she allowed her financial neglect to impact her clearance. She 
                                                     
2 SOR ¶¶ 1.f is a duplicate of 1.q; and 1.e is a duplicate of 1.m. 
 
4 
 
noted that she needed to do better and needed help to be successful. She attended 
employee sponsored debt counseling, created a budget, cut expenses, and started to 
save for an emergency. She also contacted a debt resolution attorney to assist her with 
her debts. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
5 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
6 
 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility that dates back to at least 2005, 
when she filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. Despite full-time employment since 2003, she has 
not responsibly addressed her delinquent debts in good faith or in a timely manner. Her 
delinquent debts may have been incurred under circumstances that were beyond her 
control, to include her divorce in 2011, but she has not shown sufficient evidence of 
attempts to resolve the debts until after her hearing in this case. Her failure to file Federal 
and state tax returns for several years is further evidence of gross financial 
irresponsibility.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is an auto loan that became delinquent when Applicant abandoned the 
car after an accident. It remains unresolved. SOR ¶ 1.c is not resolved, but Applicant 
intends to dispute the amount owed with the assistance of a second credit repair 
company. She did not submit sufficient evidence of the disputed amount, but agrees that 
some amount is owed. Applicant has not made sufficient effort to resolve the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, rather she is choosing to ensure her credit is not damaged by 
resurrecting the debt. SOR ¶ 1.s concerns delinquent income tax filings. There is 
insufficient evidence that this allegation has been resolved. No mitigating conditions apply 
to the allegations. 
 
Applicant is well educated, makes a substantial income, and has experience 
running a business. Her unexplained failure to pay debts and a judgment when incurred, 
and to file income tax returns when due, is troubling and inconsistent with a long-standing 
security clearance holder. Applicant’s testimony appeared to be honest and 
straightforward, but her failure to report her tax return delinquencies on her SCA is 
unfavorable and does not give me confidence that she has a handle on her finances. 
 
7 
 
Despite her efforts to address the smaller debts after her hearing, I am not 
convinced that Applicant has control of her finances, can live within her means, and that 
further delinquencies are unlikely to recur. There is insufficient evidence of resolution of 
the larger debts, filing of overdue tax returns, or financial responsibility. Mitigation credit 
is applicable for debts she has finally resolved, but no mitigating credit fully applies to 
unresolved debts, her failure to file tax returns, and her overall history of financial 
irresponsibility. I have not seen sufficient evidence of financial reform and a track record 
of financial responsibility to overcome the security concerns raised in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant is an intelligent, experienced employee who has shown a history of 
disregard for financial matters. She has not shown that she is now financially stable and 
able to adequately address her financial responsibilities in a timely manner. Accordingly, 
I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d - 1.f, 1.h - 1.q, and 1.r:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
