       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ----------------------------------        )       ISCR  Case No. 17-03919     
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gaitha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of Case
On November 22, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2006. 
02/27/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 22, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on October
23, 2018. The Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4) that were admitted
without objection. Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and seven exhibits. The
transcript was received on October 31, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with documented IRS payments.  For
good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department
Counsel was afforded two days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with documentation
of satisfaction of payments owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2013,
an endorsement from her supervisor, and a performance evaluation. Applicant’s
submissions were admitted without objection as AEs H-J.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated delinquent tax debts with
the IRS in the amount of $13,273 for tax year 2013; (b) accumulated delinquent state tax
debts in the amount of $1,073 for tax year 2013; (c) failed to timely file her federal income
tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014; and (d) failed to timely file her state income tax
returns for tax years 2013 and 2014.  Allegedly, Applicant has not resolved her delinquent
debts and filing lapses. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶
1.a and 1.c-1.d with explanations. She denied the allegations covered by SOR 1.b,
claiming she paid the taxes owed for tax year 2013 in September 2017. She further
claimed that she filed her federal and state tax returns late due to extenuating
circumstances (bad years, her words).
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old security systems specialist for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR that were admitted are
incorporated by reference. Allegations that were denied by Applicant are reserved for
fact-finding based on the developed evidence at hearing. 
Background
Applicant never married and has one three-old-son.  (GE 1; Tr. 23, 25) She earned
a high school diploma in June 1993. (GE 1; Tr. 23) She attended a community college
between September 1994 and August 2005 but earned no diploma. (GE 1; Tr. 24)
Between April 2004 and August 2004, she took college on-line courses but did not earn a
diploma. (GE 1; Tr. 24) Applicant reported no military service. (GE 1)
2
Since February 2013, Applicant has worked for her current defense contractor as a
security systems specialist. (GE 1) She previously worked for this firm between October
2005 and September 2010 as a security analyst. (GE 1; Tr. 27) Between October 2010
and February 2013, she worked for another defense contractor as a principle security
analyst. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant admits and IRS transcripts confirm that Applicant filed her federal income
tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014 out of time in September 2017, after exceeding
the extension granted her by the IRS to October 2014. (GE 2 and AE A) Transcripts
confirm, too, that she owed the IRS $13,273 for delinquent taxes accrued for the 2013 tax
year. (GEs 2 and 4-5 and AE A)  For filing her 2013 federal tax return out of time in 2017,
the IRS penalized Applicant  $1,880. (AE A) Similar penalties were imposed on Applicant
by the IRS for filing her 2014 federal return out of time in 2017. (GEs 2 and 4)  Applicant
is credited with the timely filing of her 2015 and 2016 federal and state income tax
returns. 
Besides filing late federal tax returns for tax years 2013-2014, Applicant also failed
to timely file her state income tax returns for these tax years. Ultimately, she filed her
state income tax returns in September 2017, well past the time reserved for filing timely
state returns for these tax years. 
Applicant attributed her late filing of her federal and state tax returns to extenuating
circumstances associated with her two surgeries, caring for her young son, and attending
to her mother who became gravely ill before passing away in August 2014. (GEs 1-2 and
AE F; Tr. 32-33) And she experienced emotional struggles with her father’s passing. (GEs
1-2 and AE G; Tr.  26)
In December 2017, Applicant  entered into an installment agreement with the IRS.
In compliance with her installment agreement she has made monthly payments of $190
since January 2016 and documented paying off the $12,361 balance owing in federal
taxes for tax year 2013 in November 2018. (AE A) Applicant also documented her paying
off delinquent state taxes for tax year 2013 in September 2017 in the amount $1,589. (AE
B; Tr. 37-38)
Applicant currently grosses $120,000 a year and is able to maintain her financial
obligations (inclusive of child care and rent) in current status. (GE 3; Tr. 39-40, 44) She
has a 401(k) retirement account with approximately $50,000 in the account. (Tr. 40-41)
And she is aided by the occasional child support she receives from the father of her son.
(Tr. 46)
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by her program manager and colleagues. (AE E) The
director of the DOD program she is assigned to credited her with being one of the most
3
conscientious and thorough employees with whom he has ever worked. (AE E) He
considered to be highly reliable and trustworthy in handling sensitive data and interacting
with customers. Colleagues who have worked with her for several years described her
characterize her as highly responsible in maintaining the security of the hospital networks
she works she is committed to protecting. (AE H) 
In October 2017, Applicant was nominated by her benefits manager for a company
core value award. (AE I) And she is credited with solid performance assessments in all
categories of rating for the review period of 2016-2017. (AE J) 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
4
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file her federal and
state income tax returns for tax years 2013-2014 and her accrual of delinquent federal
and state taxes for tax year 2013. 
Financial Concerns
      Applicant’s failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years
2013-2014 and her incurring of delinquent federal and state taxes for tax year
2013warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state,
or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of filing federal and state tax returns and resolving federal
and state tax delinquencies are critical to an assessment of an applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines
necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive
position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No.
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances
(i.e., surgeries, caring for her ailing mother and young child as a single mother, and her
emotional struggles associated with the passing of her father) provide some mitigation
credit for her failure to timely file her federal and state income tax returns for tax years
2013-2014 and to address her federal and state taxes due for tax year 2013.s 2005-
2013. Based on her cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has some application to
Applicant’s situation
Based on Applicant’s  cited circumstances, the “acting responsibly” prong of  MC
¶ 20(b) has considerable application. She is credited with filing her federal and state
income tax returns for tax years 2013-2014 in September 2017 (untimely, but still two
months before the issuance of the SOR) and paying her delinquent federal and state
income taxes in full for tax year 2013. While Applicant was late in filing her 2013-2014
state and federal income tax returns, the IRS implicitly accepted her late filings in
approving her installment agreement. With her payoff of the delinquent taxes she owed
6
her state taxing authority and satisfactorily completing her installment agreement with
the IRS, Applicant is able to demonstrate a good track record of compliance with the
agreement’s terms, and credibly claim the benefits of MC ¶ 20(b)  See ISCR Case No.
15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). For similar
reasons, MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is available to mitigate her federal
and state tax return filing lapses regarding tax years 2013-2014 and incurring of federal
and state tax delinquencies for tax year 2013.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely filing of tax
returns. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In Applicant’s case,
she has established a measurable track record of addressing her late state and federal
tax returns and paying off her delinquent federal and state tax payments due with the
added benefit of an installment agreement with the IRS. Her collective efforts are
enough to warrant favorable findings and conclusions with respect to raised security
concerns. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is favorable to Applicant. She has shown sufficient 
progress to date in filing her federal and state tax returns for tax years 2013-2014 and
paying off delinquent federal and state taxes due for tax year 2013 with the aid of an
approved IRS installment agreement to merit substantial mitigation credit. Applicant’s
mitigation efforts are aided by her demonstrated substantial contributions to her
employer and the U.S. defense effort generally. She is highly regarded by her manager
and colleagues and has received solid awards and performance evaluations recognizing
her service to her employer.
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing her finances reflect
considerable evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment, sufficient to
overcome raised doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect
classified information or occupy a sensitive position. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are
warranted that her finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum
eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. Favorable conclusions are
entered with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d.  Eligibility to hold a
security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is consistent with the
national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
7
     GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
                Subparagraphs. 1.a-1.d:                     For Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
  
9
10
