1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04175 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant demonstrated that circumstances beyond her control contributed to or 
aggravated her financial problems. She should have been more diligent addressing her 
delinquent accounts. Notwithstanding, she recently paid off all of her delinquent 
accounts (except one) and demonstrated that she is living within her financial means. 
Her financial problems are resolved or are being resolved. Clearance granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted her first security clearance application (SCA) on May 24, 
2016, seeking eligibility for a clearance required for her position with a federal 
contractor. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) on 
January 26, 2018. She answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on 
February 12, 2018.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on July 19, 2018. The Notice of Hearing (NOH) 
was issued on November 28, 2018, setting a hearing for December 12, 2018. At the 
02/28/2019
 
2 
 
 
hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant testified, 
presented favorable character testimony through one witness, and submitted three 
exhibits. (AE 1 through 3) All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2019. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15-days of advanced notice of her 
hearing. (Tr. 11-12) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d through 1.f, and 1.h. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.g. Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR and those at her hearing are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, including her testimony and 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She completed a 
bachelor’s degree in May 2012, and a master’s degree in 2015, both in criminal justice. 
She married her first spouse in 2007, separated in 2009, and divorced in 2012. She 
married her second spouse in 2012 and divorced in 2016. She has two children, ages 
18 and 10.  
 
In her May 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed that she had financial problems that 
included a repossessed car and numerous delinquent credit accounts, most of them 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant credibly explained that her financial problems resulted 
from her extensive periods of unemployment, her 2012 divorce, several relocations to 
different states seeking help from family members or job opportunities, and she being 
the sole provider for her children. Applicant noted that one of her children is entitled to 
court-ordered financial support; however, the father only provides sporadic support and 
is in arrears. (Tr. 25) Additionally, Applicant’s 78-year-old mother developed breast 
cancer, and Applicant moved to another state to care for her mother and provided her 
with some financial assistance. 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that she worked as a city police officer 
between 2001 and October 2005. She was laid off after a hurricane destroyed the city’s 
infrastructure and was unemployed between October 2005 and June 2006. She was 
employed between June 2006 and February 2009, as an assistant bank manager. She 
was unemployed between February 2009 and January 2010. She was employed during 
a probationary period as a city police officer between January 2010 and December 
2012. She was not offered the position after the probationary period ended, and was 
unemployed between December 2011 and October 2012.  
 
Applicant was employed as a part-time legal clerk between October 2012 and 
August 2014, and unemployed between August 2014 and November 2014. She was 
 
3 
 
 
employed with a Federal agency between November 2014 and January 2015, and 
unemployed between January and March 2015. She was rehired by the federal agency 
in March 2015 and worked there until March 2016. Her current employer and clearance 
sponsor, a federal contractor, hired Applicant in March 2016, and she was been working 
there until the present. 
 
Most of the alleged SOR debts date back to the period surrounding Applicant’s 
2009 marital separation and 2012 divorce. She stated that she did not address her 
delinquent debts sooner because she believed they were paid by her ex-husband after 
the divorce. She realized she had delinquent debts when she received the January 
2018 SOR. Applicant explained that even if she had known about her delinquent debts 
sooner, she was the sole breadwinner of the family, and her income was insufficient to 
pay her family’s living expenses and pay her debts.  
 
Since January 2018, Applicant has been diligently addressing her delinquent 
accounts. The SOR alleged eight delinquent or charged-off accounts. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence (AE 1) shows that she settled and paid seven of the SOR debts 
(¶¶ 1.a through 1.f and 1.h).  
 
The remaining debt, SOR ¶ 1.g, alleged a delinquent car note for $12,985. 
Applicant and her first husband purchased a car in 2008. When they separated in 2009, 
her ex-husband promised to make the car payments, but he failed to do so. When the 
creditor confronted her with the delinquent payments, she voluntarily surrendered the 
car to the creditor. I note that the debt is more than seven years old, and as such it is 
uncollectable. Her ex-husband has some responsibility for paying the debt. Additionally, 
Applicant disputed the debt (GE 2), and it is no longer reflected on Applicant’s more 
recent credit reports.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that she should have been more diligent paying her 
delinquent accounts. However, she believes she was doing the best she could do under 
her circumstances. She understands the seriousness of the security concerns raised by 
her financial problems. Applicant credibly promised to timely pay her debts in the future 
and to resolve her financial problems.  
 
Applicant believes that with her current income, her financial situation is now 
stable, and she will be able to maintain her financial responsibility and eligibility for a 
clearance. Her hourly wage is $30.80, and she makes between $75,000 and $85,000 a 
year, depending on overtime. Applicant has not received financial counseling, but she is 
following a budget, subscribed to credit reporting agencies to keep track of her finances, 
and purchased books to help her improve her credit. (Tr. 22-23).  
 
Applicant owes about $130,000 in student loans. She is current on her student 
loan payments and is paying them under an income-based repayment plan. Applicant 
understands that for her to be eligible for a clearance, and her job with a Federal 
contractor, she has to maintain and demonstrate her financial responsibility. A review of 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s most recent credit reports shows that she has no current delinquencies, and 
she is keeping up on her finances. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. AG ¶ 19 
provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.1  
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
 
6 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 All of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are raised by the 
facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. She developed financial problems 
because of numerous periods of unemployment, her divorce, her being the sole family 
provider, and caring for and providing some financial assistance to her mother. 
Applicant recently paid off all the SOR debts (except SOR ¶ 1.g). Her ex-husband has 
some responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. She currently has no delinquencies 
reflected in her credit reports and appears to be living within her financial means. 
Applicant’s financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur, and they 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s efforts to resolve her debt, although recent, show diligence and 
responsibility in the handling of her financial obligations. Applicant has not received 
financial counseling, but she is following a budget. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant resolved or is resolving her financial problems and her finances are 
under control. She credibly promised to maintain her financial responsibility. Her 
earnings should be sufficient to pay for her family’s living expenses and current debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
                                                                                                                                            
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
her employer since 2016. This is her first clearance application. The record evidence is 
sufficient to establish that her financial problems are resolved or are being resolved, and 
her finances are under control. Applicant demonstrated a recent track record of paying 
her financial obligations. She is fully aware of the security concerns raised by her failure 
to maintain financial responsibility. She promised to maintain her financial responsibility. 
The financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
