 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------ )       ADP Case No. 17-03773 
) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 11, 2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 30, 2016. (Government Exhibit 1.) On November 16, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
National Security Adjudication Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, effective within the 
Department of Defense after June 8, 2017. 
  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 14, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on January 30, 2018. The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on March 8, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 30, 2018. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Applicant Exhibits A through I, which were admitted without objection, and testified 
on her own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open to permit her to 
submit additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on May 8, 2018. 
Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit J in a timely manner. Department Counsel had no 
objection and the exhibit was admitted into evidence. The record then closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old and employed by a defense contractor as a clinical 
analyst. She is separated from her husband, and has two children. Applicant is seeking 
to obtain national security eligibility for access to sensitive information in connection with 
her employment.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began in about 2010, when she separated from her 
abusive husband and gained custody of her youngest child. She initially struggled 
financially while working in the nursing field in her home state, since she only had an 
associate’s degree. Determined to better herself professionally, and monetarily, Applicant 
both worked and attended school online over several years. By 2016 she had obtained a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. At this point in time she accepted a new job in 
a new state, and moved across the country. Applicant is now working to obtain a doctorate 
degree, which will again make her more marketable and increase her income. Starting in 
2016 Applicant began working on a five-year plan to resolve her debts, with results as 
shown below. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section 12; Applicant Exhibits A, G, H, I, and J at 
8; Tr. 25, 31-41, 66-70.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for national 
security eligibility because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially 
unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.j. She denied allegations 1.a, 
1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i.   
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed approximately $38,350 in past-due 
indebtedness to various creditors. The existence and amount of the debts is supported 
by admissions of the Applicant, and credit reports submitted by the Government dated 
January 27, 2017; and January 30, 2018. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.) Applicant 
 
 
3 
 
 
submitted a credit report dated December 14, 2017, with her Answer. (Attachment One.) 
She submitted an additional credit report dated March 30, 2018. (Applicant Exhibit E.) 
 
 The current status of the debts is as follows:  
 
 1.a. Applicant denied that she owed a judgment in the amount of $4,397. Applicant 
testified that she had no knowledge of this debt. When Applicant got her job in 2016 she 
began educating herself on how to resolve her debts. One of the things she learned was 
to dispute debts she did not recognize. Accordingly, Applicant disputed this debt with the 
credit reporting agencies. (Applicant Exhibit I; Tr. 41-47.) This debt appeared on the 
government’s 2017 credit report (Government Exhibit 4), but does not appear on the latest 
credit reports in the record. (Government Exhibit 3; Attachment One; Applicant Exhibit G.) 
Applicant has successfully disputed this debt.      
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $375 for a mobile telephone bill. Applicant had 
acquired the cell phone for her then-boyfriend in about 2012. He was an abusive person 
who also stole from Applicant during their relationship. She intends to pay this debt as 
others are paid off. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 47-48.) 
  
 1.c. Applicant admitted that she owed $876 for a past-due credit card debt. 
Applicant was unable to pay anything on this debt for several years, until she obtained 
her current employment. Starting in 2016 she has been making consistent payments on 
this account and has paid it down considerably. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibit J at 6; Tr. 48-56.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted that she owed $1,095 for a past-due credit card debt. 
Applicant was unable to pay anything on this debt for several years, until she obtained 
her current employment. Starting in 2016 she has been making consistent payments on 
this account and has paid it down considerably. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibit J at 5; Tr. 48-56.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied that she owed $14,605 for a repossessed automobile that 
belonged to Applicant’s daughter. Applicant filed a dispute concerning this debt. 
(Applicant Exhibit J at 8; Tr. 56-57.) This debt appeared on the government’s 2017 credit 
report (Government Exhibit 4), but does not appear on the latest credit reports in the 
record. (Government Exhibit 3; Attachment One; Applicant Exhibit G.) Applicant 
successfully disputed this debt. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted that she owed $282 to a creditor for a past-due cable debt. 
Applicant supplied documentation showing that she began paying this debt off after being 
employed in her current job. This debt has now been paid in full and is resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibit J at 6-7; Tr. 57-59.) 
 
 1.g, Applicant denied owing a creditor $246 for a past-due debt. Applicant stated 
that she had no knowledge of the account and had never purchased anything from the 
 
 
4 
 
 
creditor. Applicant filed an unsuccessful dispute concerning this debt. Applicant stated 
that she will pay this debt, even though she adamantly denied owing it. This debt is not 
resolved. (Tr. 59.) 
  
 1.h. Applicant denied owing a past-due debt in the amount of $5,790 for a bank 
card. Applicant stated that she had only one credit card with this bank, yet the debt is 
being collected by two different collection agencies. This one and one stated in allegation 
1.i, below. When contacted, the bank could not find a record of Applicant’s account. 
Applicant filed a dispute concerning this debt. (Applicant Exhibit J at 7-8; Tr. 60-63.) This 
debt appeared on the government’s 2017 credit report (Government Exhibit 4), but does 
not appear on the latest credit reports in the record. (Government Exhibit 3; Attachment 
One; Applicant Exhibit G.) Applicant successfully disputed this debt. 
 
 1.i. Applicant denied owing a past-due debt in the amount of $7,534 for a bank 
card. Applicant stated that she had only one credit card with this bank, yet the debt is 
being collected by two different collection agencies. This one and one stated in allegation 
1.h, above. When contacted, the bank could not find a record of Applicant’s account. 
Applicant filed a dispute concerning this debt. (Applicant Exhibit J at 7-8; Tr. 60-63.) This 
debt appeared on the government’s 2017 credit report (Government Exhibit 4), but does 
not appear on the latest credit reports in the record. (Government Exhibit 3; Attachment 
One; Applicant Exhibit G.) Applicant successfully disputed this debt. 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $3,150. Applicant intends to begin paying 
this debt after paying off the debts in allegations 1.c and 1.d. She has reached out to the 
creditor and they may be willing to accept a one-time payment. (Applicant Exhibit J at 7; 
Tr. 63.) This debt is not resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. She has a budget and sticks to it. 
She lives very frugally, while supporting her mother and her daughter. She has worked 
hard over the last several years to get her financial house in order, and has a plan to pay 
the rest of her debts in the future. Applicant understands the importance of resolving her 
past-due debts and remaining fiscally secure into the future. (Applicant Exhibits A, B, F, 
and J at 8; Tr. 28-31, 65-66, 70-83.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor submitted a letter on her behalf. The writer hired 
Applicant for her current position in 2016. Applicant had been open and honest about her 
financial situation and how she planned to resolve it. The supervisor stated, “I find her 
[Applicant] to be an honorable person who exercises sound judgment on a daily basis.” 
The writer recommends Applicant for a position of trust. (Applicant Exhibit J at 9.) 
 
 Applicant provided two letters of recommendation from people who know her at 
work. One coworker stated, “She [Applicant] has a great deal of integrity.” A senior training 
 
 
5 
 
 
and development specialist stated, “[Applicant] is a responsible, honest and hardworking 
individual.” (Applicant Exhibits C and D.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I, ADP II, and ADP III are classified as “noncritical-
sensitive.” (See DoD Manual 5200.02, April 3, 2017 (Manual) ¶¶ 4.1.a.(3)(c) and 7.a.) 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 20014, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and 
Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
national security eligibility decision may be made. (See Manual ¶ 10.3.) 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks national security eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
 
 
6 
 
 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. Finally, as 
emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also 
Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had approximately $38,000 in past-due debts that she had not paid or 
resolved as of the time the SOR was issued. These facts establish prima facie support 
for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate 
those concerns. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had a difficult time financially starting around 2010 to 2016. She left her 
abusive husband, was involved in a second abusive relationship, and had insufficient 
education to make financial ends meet with the jobs she could get. She went back to 
school and eventually received her master’s degree. In 2016 she found a new job in a 
new state, moved, and began preparing and fulfilling a five-year plan to resolve her debts. 
As shown above, Applicant has paid one debt in full, and is paying two other old credit 
card debts, while maintaining payments on her current indebtedness. It is not easy, and 
Applicant has had to make some difficult choices, but she is succeeding in paying down 
her debt and there is light at the end of the tunnel. She has shown herself to be 
responsible in resolving her indebtedness, beginning payments before the SOR was 
issued. AG ¶ 20(b) applies because much of the debt, and Applicant’s inability to pay it, 
was related to her separation from her husband. 
 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve her financial situation, as shown 
by the voluntary payments to several creditors. As the DOHA Appeal Board has said, “An 
applicant is not required to show that she has completely paid off her indebtedness, only 
that she has established a reasonable plan to resolve her debts and has taken significant 
actions to implement that plan.”1 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) apply. 
   
                                                 
1ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006)). 
 
 
8 
 
 
As part of her five-year plan, Applicant pro-actively disputed questionable debts 
that she found on her credit report. Those debts have been removed. I find that AG ¶ 
20(e) applies. 
 
The Appeal Board has stated: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrates that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.2  
 
 Applicant’s current financial status is stable, and she evinces a credible intent and 
ability to maintain that stability into the future. Applicant has made substantial lifestyle 
changes that will assist her in staying on a proper financial footing. She has fully mitigated 
all the allegations in the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a national security eligibility by considering the totality of the 
applicant=s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
                                                 
2 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding her financial situation. Her actions have minimized the potential for 
coercion or duress, and make recurrence of financial issues unlikely. Overall, the record 
evidence does not create substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national 
security eligibility, and access to sensitive information. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility to occupy a designated ADP I/II/III sensitive position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
