 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00473 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and F.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 14, 
2017. Due to Applicant’s location in The Republic of Korea, he asked that a notice of 
hearing not be issued until April of 2018. As a result, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 24, 2018, scheduling the 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
hearing for May 23, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection, and Hearing 
Exhibit (HX) I for Administrative Notice. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented one document, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AppXs) A. The record 
was left open for an additional two months until July 23, 2018, for receipt of additional 
documentation. Applicant submitted no additional evidence, only a one page closing 
statement. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on June 8, 2016. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Philippines. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of 
the facts, supported by Government documents pertaining to the Philippines, identified 
as HE I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations in SOR, with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 14.) He has been employed with the defense contractor “since November 2016.”  
(TR at page 13 line 21 to page 16 line 11.) Previously divorced “in 2014,” he is now 
married to a Philippine national, and has two children from his previous marriage. (Id.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. and 1.d. Applicant’s wife is a citizen of the Philippines, but resides with 
Applicant in Korea. (TR at page 16 line 19 to page 18 line 21, and at page 35 lines 
5~11.) He gives his wife about $250 each month which she deposits in a Philippine 
bank account. (Id.) 
 
 1.b., and 1.c. Applicant father-in-law “passed away” in 2017, and his mother-in-
law “is a homemaker.” He currently provides no financial support for his mother-in-law, 
who plans to join her sister in the United States. (TR at page 19 line 3 to page 20 line 
22, and at page 23 lines 2~13.)  Applicant’s seven brothers-in-law and two sisters-in-law 
“live in the mountains.” (TR at page 19 line 3 to page 20 line 22.) The men work “a little 
construction, [and] farm work,” while the women “wash clothes for money.” (TR at page 
34 line 8 to page 35 line 11.) “They [all] think . . . [Applicant fixes] electronics.” (TR at 
page 22 line 23 to page 23 line 1.) 
 
 
3 
 
 1.e. Applicant only owns property in the Philippines, worth about $18,000, where 
he plans to “retire” in about 15~20 years. He does not own any property in the United 
States. (TR at page 21 line 12 to page 22 line 22.) 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes his current financial difficulties to the hospitalization of his 
former spouse, his subsequent divorce, a cut in pay, and a personal bout with stomach 
cancer. (TR at page 26 line 11 to page 27 line 15, and at page 38 line 16 to page 40 line 
25.) 
 
 2.a. Applicant has filed his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2014 and 
2015, as evidenced by documentation included in his Answer to the SOR. (TR at page 
25 line 25 to page 26 line 10, at page 27 line 19 to page 28 line 15, and Answer.) This 
allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 2.b.  Applicant owes a past-due debt to the Army and Air Force  Exchange 
Service (AFES) in the amount of about $11,000. (TR at page 28 lines 16~21, and at 
page 37 lines 5~20.) Despite having two months after his hearing to do so, Applicant 
has provided nothing further in this regard. This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.c., 2.e., and 2.f.  Applicant owes three past-due debts to a credit union in the 
amount of about $21,000. (TR at page 28 line 22 to page 31 line 4, at page 32 line 3 to 
page 35 line 8, and at page 36 line 12 to page 37 line 4.) Despite having two months 
after his hearing to do so, Applicant has provided nothing further in this regard. These 
allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 2.d. Applicant has paid a $532 past-due debt on an automobile loan, as 
evidenced by documentation showing this automobile has been sold. (TR at page 31 
lines 5~17, and AppX A.) This allegation is found for Applicant.  
  
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to the Philippines: the United 
States continues to work with the Philippine government to monitor and investigate 
groups engaged in or supporting terrorist activities in the Philippines. The Philippine 
government is also currently engaged in a nationwide counter-narcotics campaign. 
Extrajudicial killings have been the chief human rights concern in the Philippines. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
5 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
  Applicant’s wife is a Philippine national. He gives her monies each month, which 
she deposits in a Philippine back account. Applicant only owns property in the 
Philippines, and plans to retire there. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 None of these apply. Apart from his U.S. citizenship and his job position, much of 
Applicant’s emotional interest, and all of his property interest appears to reside in the 
Philippines. Guideline B is found against Applicant.  
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
7 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a long history of 
delinquencies. Although Applicant can attribute much of his debt to circumstances 
largely beyond his control, he has about $30,000 in past-due debt that he has yet to 
 
8 
 
address. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20 has not been established. Guideline F is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign 
Influence and Financial Consideration security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
