KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegations of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, 
it contains documents that were not previously submitted to the Judge for consideration.  The
Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-01008.a1
DATE: 02/12/2019
DATE: February 12, 2019
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-01008
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
22, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 19, 2018, after considering the record, Administrative Judge
Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
  
Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegations of error on the part of the Judge.   Rather,  it
contains documents that were not previously submitted to the Judge for consideration.  The Appeal
Board cannot consider new evidence.  Directive ¶ E.3.1.29.  His brief also explains the reasons for
his financial difficulties and his efforts to resolve them. 
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                  
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                     
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                     
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
