KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that the colleague sought a
protective order.  He argues that this finding is a misreading of a memorandum for record by the
FSO, included in the record as Item 4.  He contends that there is no evidence that the colleague
actually sought a protective order.  The pertinent language in the FSO’s memo is as follows: “I
was contacted by the [sheriff’s office] and advised that the [colleague] was seeking a protective
order against [Applicant] as result of [Applicant’s] expression of emotional instability and the
threatening language of the online conversation.”  The challenged finding is consistent with this
evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03840.a1
DATE: 02/14/2019
DATE: February 14, 2019
In Re:
----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03840
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Danel A. Dufresne, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 19, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On October 23, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge John Bayard Glendon denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Government contractor.  He served on active duty with the U.S.
military and after that in the National Guard, receiving honorable discharges from both.  As a
contractor, he performed duties in a war zone, though he quit his job after being accused of
insubordination.  In 2016, Applicant made some remarks to a colleague that were threatening in
nature.  Applicant had been showing attention to a female co-worker in whom the colleague was also
interested.  Applicant’s interaction with the female co-worker drew the attention of fellow workers,
who complained to the Facility Security Officer (FSO).  The threatening remarks in question were
contained in online messages exchanged between Applicant and his male colleague.  The messages
included an admission by Applicant that he was unstable, that he was “10 times stronger” than the
colleague, and that he “can carry a weapon.”  Decision at 3.  When the colleague told Applicant that
his behavior could threaten his clearance, he replied, “[Y]ou should [know] better [than] to threaten
someone who’s not all there . . . I hate life[.]”  Id.   The colleague sought a protective order against
Applicant based upon Applicant’s emotional instability and threatening messages.  Applicant’s
access to classified information was suspended, and his employer terminated him.
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had been terminated but stated that he
did not recall the exact wording of his communications with the colleague.  In his background
interview, he stated that the colleague had been trying to provoke him and that before writing the
messages in question he had consumed alcohol and a prescription drug.  Applicant admitted to the
interviewer that he had previously sat for an interview by another Government agency (AGA).  He 
disclosed that he had initially misled the AGA interviewer by surmising that the threats in question
had been sent by someone who had hacked into his on line social media account.  When the AGA
interviewer produced copies of the threatening messages, Applicant admitted that “it looked like
something I might say.”  Id. at 4.  
Applicant did not disclose his job termination in his security clearance application (SCA). 
He claimed that he was not fired but, rather, “let go” because his clearance had been terminated. 
2
Id.  Applicant’s excuse demonstrates that his omission was deliberate.  The Judge stated that this
finding was supported by Applicant’s initial attempt to mislead the interviewer for AGA.1
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that none of the mitigating conditions had been established.  He stated
that Applicant had presented no evidence with regard to the threats, except to assert that he had been
drinking and taking a sleep aid medication.  The Judge concluded that, given the seriousness of the
threats, Applicant’s explanation was not entitled to significant weight.  The Judge noted his
favorable findings for the alleged SCA omission.  However, he stated that he was considering the
omission in evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation and for the whole-person analysis.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his misconduct.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that the colleague sought a protective
order.  He argues that this finding is a misreading of a memorandum for record by the FSO, included
in the record as Item 4.  He contends that there is no evidence that the colleague actually sought a
protective order.  The pertinent language in the FSO’s memo is as follows: “I was contacted by the
[sheriff’s office] and advised that the [colleague] was seeking a protective order against [Applicant]
as result of [Applicant’s] expression of emotional instability and the threatening language of the
online conversation.”  Item 4. The challenged finding is consistent with this evidence.  Even if the
finding is to some extent erroneous, it did not likely affect the overall outcome of the case and,
therefore, is harmless.  After considering Applicant’s brief as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s
material findings are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the
evidence.  Applicant has cited to no harmful error in the Decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-
02640 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2018). 
Applicant’s argument that the Judge failed to consider mitigating concerns includes things
from outside the record, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.2  Applicant cites to matters
that he believes are favorable to him, such as evidence that his alleged threats were provoked by
messages that the colleague sent to him.  He also cites to his explanation that he was under the
1The Judge resolved the allegation regarding the SCA omission in Applicant’s favor because the allegation
misstated the date of the SCA.  
2Applicant argues that our refusal to consider new evidence constitutes a “kneejerk reaction.”  Appeal Brief at
6, n. 15.  Noting that we will consider new evidence on questions of due process, he contends that the Judge’s purported
reliance upon “inaccurate evidence” constituted violations of due process that justify our consideration of the additional
information that he submitted along with his brief.  The prohibition against our considering new evidence is contained
in the explicit language of the Directive, and we are bound by it.  Applicant’ brief argues that the Judge misstated and
mis-weighed the evidence, but he does not present a prima facie reason to believe that Applicant was denied an
opportunity to present evidence in mitigation or that he was otherwise denied the due process afforded by the Directive.
  
3
influence of a combination of alcohol and a sleep aid at the time of his conduct.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 17-00109 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2018).  
Applicant argues the Judge’s decision is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion. The Board does not agree.  An ability to argue for a different interpretation
of the evidence is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02463 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 10,
2018). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.” 
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                  
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
