1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-01145 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from Senegal, does not have a foreign preference for France. 
Even though he maintains ties to Senegal and France, he has shown that he will 
resolve any potential conflicts of interest in favor of the United States. Clearance is 
granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 24, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign preference guidelines.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
02/21/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the written 
record. However, after receiving a copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
April 2, 2018, he requested that his case be converted to a hearing.2 On May 22, 2018, 
Department Counsel fulfilled the Government’s discovery obligation, confirming 
Applicant’s receipt of the documents the Government intended to offer in its case 
against him that were appended to the FORM.3 At the hearing, convened on November 
1, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A 
through C, without objection.  I received the transcript (Tr.) on November 9, 2018. On 
November 16, 2018, I recommended this case for summary disposition in Applicant’s 
favor; however, the Government objected without explanation.4  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
regarding the Republic of Senegal. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the 
request and the document is appended to the record as HE III.5  
 
On January 18, 2019, I sent the parties an email, indicating that I intended to 
take administrative notice of facts regarding the Republic of Senegal, the Republic of 
France, its nationality laws, and its historical relationship with Senegal from the U.S. 
Department of State, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Government of the 
Republic of France. The parties did not object, and the email and the documents are 
appended to the record as HE V through X.6 
 
Department Counsel requested permission to submit additional administrative 
notice documents in response to those I identified.  In a submission dated, February 8, 
2019,7 Department Counsel requested that I take “simple notice . . . of the adjudicative 
fact that embassies are very frequently subject to deadly attacks.” In support of the 
proposition, Department Counsel offered: a Wikipedia list of the attacks on diplomatic 
missions around the world between 1829 and 2018; a Wikipedia article detailing the 
1974 attack on the French Embassy at The Hague; an excerpt of a February 2018 
article from the French news organization, French 24, regarding attacks on French 
embassies in Africa since 2000; and an article from Voice of America News regarding a 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 HE II.  
 
4 HE IV.  
 
5 HE III: U.S. Department of State: Diplomacy in Action – Senegal, December 2009 
 
6 The facts that I have taken administrative notice are from the following sources: HE V: Central 
Intelligence Agency: The World Factbook – Senegal; HE VI: U.S. Department of State: Country Reports 
on Terrorism 2017; HE VII: Central Intelligence Agency: The World Factbook – France; and, HE VIII: U.S. 
Department of State: U.S. Relations with France. 
 
7  HE XI 
 
3 
 
March 2018 attack on the French embassy in Burkina Faso. Applicant responded to 
Department Counsel’s request as well as the proposed documents, and his comments 
are construed an an objection to their consideration. By its very nature an adjudicative 
fact is adduced from the record after the adversarial presentation of evidence and is not 
appropriate for administrative notice. Setting aside the adjudicative fact offered by 
Department Counsel, the supporting documents are also inappropriate for 
administrative notice. The documents neither set forth nor are appropriate sources of 
legislative facts - those necessary to understand a principal of law and not subject to 
evidentiary proof (e.g. official pronouncements of the President, State Department, 
Department of Defense, or other appropriate federal agencies on matters of national 
security).8 However, the documents are appropriate for consideration as Government’s 
Exhibits, and will be admitted to the record as GE 3 through 6, over Applicant’s 
objection. I will consider each document and give it the appropriate weight. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 42, has worked as a senior associate for a federal contracting 
company since February 2015. He completed a security clearance application, his first, 
in March 2015, disclosing his family members and financial interests in Senegal as well 
as family members in France. He also disclosed part-time employment at the French 
Embassy in the United States between 1999 and 2015. The SOR alleges the contacts 
as disqualifying under the foreign influence and foreign preference guidelines.9  
Applicant was born in the Republic of Senegal, a secular republic with a strong 
presidency, bicameral legislature, and multiple political parties. Between 1865 and 
1960, Senegal was considered a territory of France. However, the two nations 
established diplomatic relations soon after Senegal gained its independence in August 
1960. Today, both France and Senegal work closely together in West African regional 
affairs, and maintain a close cultural and political relationship. However, this relationship 
does not provide a right to French citizenship for citizens of Senegal.10   
Since its independence, Senegal has maintained one of the most stable 
governments in Africa. The country is one of the few African states that has never 
experienced a coup d’état and throughout its history power has transferred peacefully to 
new administrations. Senegal maintains a well-trained military that receives most of its 
training, equipment, and support from the United States and France, with whom 
Senegal maintains close and favorable relationships. The country has historically taken 
an active role in United Nations peacekeeping efforts throughout Africa.11  
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4, FN 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). 
 
9 GE 1.  
 
10 GE 1; HE III, HE V. 
 
11 HE III.  
 
 
4 
 
According to the most recent Country Report on Terrorism published by the U.S. 
State Department, Senegal did not experience any terror attacks in 2017. However, the 
Senegalese government arrested two individuals with suspected ties to the Islamic 
State. The Government of Senegal works closely with U.S. military and law enforcement 
officials to strengthen its counterterrorism capabilities. The risk of terrorist activity in 
Senegal arises from external and internal factors. Externally, transnational threats arose 
due to the Senegalese military presence in several theaters of operation in the region 
and the activities of terrorist groups in neighboring countries. Internally, the promotion of 
fundamentalist ideologies by a small number of religious leaders constituted the chief 
concern, however, these ideologies are outside the Islamic norms that predominate in 
Senegal.12 
 The Republic of France is comprised of metropolitan France and the following 
territories: French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Reunion. Historically, 
France and the United States have maintained a friendly and active relationship. The 
two countries share common values and have parallel polices on most political, 
economic, and security issues. The United States and France work closely on many 
issues, including counterterrorism, efforts to end the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction, and on regional problems around the world.13  
 
 Applicant lived in Senegal with his family until his father, a now retired member of 
the Senegalese Army, served his final tour of duty as a military attaché at a Senegalese 
embassy between 1991 and his retirement in 1995. Applicant attended college in 
France from 1994 to 1998, graduating with a degree in economics. He immigrated to 
the United States in 1999 after being awarded permanent resident status through the 
diversity visa lottery program, which provides 55,000 permanent residents visas each 
year to individuals from countries with a low rate of immigration to the United States.14 
He became a naturalized citizen in April 2005.15  
 
 Upon moving to the United States, Applicant entered graduate school and 
worked a series of low-paying jobs to support himself. In 1999, while visiting the French 
Embassy to have documents translated, he saw a family friend. The friend informed 
Applicant about security positions available at the embassy. The position required 
Applicant to check identification for individuals entering the embassy, walk around the 
embassy to ensure employees left for the day, and answer after-hours phone calls from 
local law enforcement regarding issues with French nationals or French nationals 
needing assistance with local enforcement. The position was not armed, as the grounds 
were guarded by French police officers who responded to threats or suspicious 
                                                          
12 HE VI.  
 
13 HE VI – VIII.  
 
14 See https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us-visas/immigrate/diversity-visa-program-entry.html 
 
15 GE 1; Tr. 19-21, 53-54. 
 
 
5 
 
activities. Applicant worked the security position part-time and attended graduate school 
full-time between 1999 and 2002.16 
 
He continued the part-time position at the embassy when he began full-time 
employment because he had grown accustomed to the busy schedule. The job was not 
difficult, and it allowed him to accumulate savings. He reported the part-time job to each 
of his previous employers: an international bank (2003 to 2005); his current employer 
(2005 to 2013, and 2015 to present); and, an international management consulting firm 
(2013 to 2015). While completing the security clearance application, the nature of the 
questions caused Applicant to become concerned that the part-time embassy positon 
presented a conflict of interest with having access to classified information. Around the 
same time, the embassy considered changing the security officer role to an armed-
guard position, which Applicant had no interest in pursuing. As a result, he resigned the 
embassy position. He ceased all ties with embassy contacts when he left the position in 
2015, including his contacts with a French police officer with whom he maintained a 
casual friendship (SOR ¶ 1.k).17 
 
Aside from taking advantage of the health benefits while he was a graduate 
student, Applicant received no other benefits from the French government during his 
employment at the embassy. When he began working full-time in 2002, he relied on his 
employer-offered health benefits. The embassy job did not provide Applicant a pathway 
to French citizenship. According to Applicant, the embassy treated him as a U.S. citizen, 
which impacted how the embassy compensated him in compliance with U.S. tax laws. 
He paid income taxes only to the U.S. Government. The job neither created obligation 
between him and the French government, nor did it entitle him to receive benefits from 
the French government.  The job did not require a security clearance or access to any 
sensitive or classified information.18  
 
 Applicant maintains ties to Senegal and France through his family members. His 
parents are residents and citizens of Senegal (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b). His father, 81, no 
longer works. After retiring from military service he briefly worked for a private 
university. Applicant’s mother, 73, also retired, worked as an educator. Both receive 
government pensions and are financially self-sufficient. Applicant has seven siblings, 
one of whom is deceased. His two oldest sisters (SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.h), 55 and 50, 
respectively, are residents and citizens of France. The oldest sister works as a 
consultant, the other works as an administrator at a French financial institution. 
Applicant’s two older brothers (SOR ¶¶ 1.d - 1.e), 48 and 46, respectively, are citizens 
of Senegal and residents of France. The older brother is a construction worker and the 
younger brother is disabled and does not work. Applicant’s two younger sisters (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f and 1.g), are citizens of Senegal. The older of the two, who is 38, is a resident of 
France and works for a French bank. His youngest sister, 30, resides in Senegal and 
                                                          
16 GE 1; Tr. 44-46, 49-50. 
 
17 GE 1; Tr. 35-36, 45-46. 
 
18 Tr. 48, 50-53. 
 
 
6 
 
works for a French mining company.19 Applicant also has one friend who is a citizen of 
France, residing in Senegal and is employed as an economist with the Senegalese 
Ministry of Finance. (SOR ¶ 1.j).20 
 
  Applicant owns property in Senegal: two parcels of land (SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n) 
valued at $14,000 (USD),  and a house (SOR ¶ 1.o) valued at $115,000. He owns the 
properties outright and they are managed by his youngest sister. The house is rented 
and generates approximately $600 in revenue each month. The proceeds are held in a 
Senegalese bank account (SOR ¶ 1.l), which Applicant opened at a U.S. branch in 
2013. Applicant uses the money in the Senegalese bank account to pay for his parents’ 
pet projects, such as redecorating their home. He admits that in the past he has 
provided them as much as $6,000 each year in financial support. Applicant does not 
provide financial support to any other of his family members on a continuing basis, and 
he does not rely on the income generated by the Senegalese properties for his ongoing 
financial maintenance.21  
 
 Since 2016, Applicant has lived and worked overseas. He is slated to continue in 
this position until at least 2020, pending the resolution of his security clearance. 
Applicant’s annual compensation is approximately $200,000 and earns additional 
income on the rental of his home while he works overseas. He has approximately 
$300,000 in retirement savings, and between $30,000 and $50,000 in stocks and other 
cash assets. He purchased his home in the United States in 2011 for approximately 
$306,000 and it is now valued at $450,000. He owes $100,000 on the mortgage loan 
and has $2,000 in other consumer debt.22  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
19 The SOR also alleges this sibling in SOR ¶ 1.i. The duplicate allegation is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
20 GE 1; Tr. 25-35, 55-56. 
 
21 Tr. 36-41. 
 
22 AE A-C; Tr. 22-24, 42-44. 
 
7 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites  
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
Foreign Preference  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then they may provide information or make decision that 
are harmful to the interests of the United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns 
about an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with 
U.S. national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s part-time employment as a security officer at 
the French Embassy in the United States from 1999 to 2015 is evidence of Applicant’s 
foreign preference for France over the United States. The Government argues that 
Applicant established a foreign preference when he chose to work for the French 
Embassy over a U.S Government employer or enter the U.S. armed forces.23 However, 
                                                          
23 Tr. 60.  
 
 
8 
 
the relevant disqualifying condition requires more to find a foreign preference. The 
relevant Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition AG ¶¶ 10(d) states that an 
Applicant acts in a way that indicates a foreign preference when he participates in 
foreign activities.  
 
Although Applicant assumed employment with a foreign government, there is no 
evidence that the nature of the employment with France, a long-time ally, conflicted with 
U.S. interests. There is no evidence that the French Embassy, as suggested by the 
Government, is part of the “strong cultural heritage of embassies being associated with 
espionage.”24 The position was not, as Department Counsel argues, akin to foreign 
military service.25 The position did not make Applicant part of the French diplomatic 
corps, armed forces, or even the armed police force responsible for the physical 
protection of the embassy. Applicant did not swear an oath of allegiance to France. The 
position did not provide a pathway to French citizenship, make Applicant eligible for any 
entitlements from the French government, or bestow upon him any rights or privileges of 
French citizenship or residency. He did not require a security clearance from the French 
Government, nor did the position expose him to any sensitive or classified information.  
 
Applicant worked at the French Embassy in the United States because it 
furthered his personal goals. Initially, he worked the part-time position because it 
provided income and medical benefits while he attended graduate school full time 
between 1999 and 2002. He continued working the part-time job after earning his 
graduate degree because it furthered his financial goals. However, when he believed 
the job presented a potential conflict of interest with his current full-time position on a 
federal contract, he resigned and ceased contacts with embassy employees. Also, his 
unwillingness to continue in the position if he was required carry a firearm is another 
indication that he did not have an allegiance or preference for France. Aside from 
maintaining the part-time employment, Applicant has not acted in any other way to 
demonstrate a foreign preference for France.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interests, including . . . business, financial and property 
interests, are a national security concern if they result in a divided allegiance [or] . . . 
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” An assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign interest is located, including 
but not limited to, consideration such as whether it is known target U.S. citizen to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s multiple ties to Senegal and France constitute 
a possible foreign influence, in particular that his familial and financial ties to Senegal 
and his familial ties to France create a “heightened risk” of foreign influence or 
                                                          
24 Tr. 58-59, 61-62. 
 
25 Tr. 61. 
 
9 
 
exploitation because of the respective foreign tie, contact, or interest. The “heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country, but it is 
nonetheless a relatively low standard. The nature and strength of the family ties or other 
foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are relevant in 
assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. The risk 
of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or dependent on, the 
foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign government, the 
administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the country at 
issue.26 Based on the available record, there is not a heightened risk associated with 
either country, which the Government seems to concede.27  
 
 Historically, both countries maintain close ties to the United States. Neither 
country, nor non-governmental entities operating inside their borders, is known to 
manipulate its citizens or ex-patriots to further their political or economic positions. 
Neither is known to be a state sponsor of terrorism. Although terrorist threats have 
become a greater concern in France in recent years, the United States and France have 
maintained a favorable relationship, often working together on counterterrorism issues. 
Senegal, on the other hand, does not have history of terrorist groups operating within its 
borders, nor have U.S. interests operating in the country been a target of terrorist 
organizations.28  
 
 Also, there is no heightened risk associated with Applicant’s father’s status as a 
retired military officer or Applicant’s friend’s position as an employee of the Senegalese 
government as an economist. Applicant’s father has been retired for 25 years and there 
is no evidence that he or Applicant maintains ongoing contact with any military or other 
government officials, or that Applicant has used these contacts in a way that increases 
his vulnerability to exploitation. Likewise, there is no evidence in the record to indicate 
that Applicant’s friend has a position or status that raises a concern.  
  
 While a heightened risk may not exist, his familial and financial ties to Senegal 
may create a personal conflict of interest, or a conflict of interest between his obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology or the desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information or technology.29 However, this 
concern is mitigated. None of his family members are currently employed by the 
Senegalese or French governments, or have positions in those societies that he will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between foreign interests and those of the 
                                                          
26 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
27 Tr. 64. 
 
28 HE III, V – VIII. 
 
29 AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
 
10 
 
United States.30 The SOR alleges Applicant’s relationships with his friend employed by 
the Senegalese government and a police officer at the French embassy. The former 
relationship can be classified as casual and infrequent. The latter relationship no longer 
exists. The record does not contain any evidence that either relationship could serve as 
a source of vulnerability.31 
 
 Applicant’s Senegalese assets do not create a conflict of interest. The assets, 
valued at $130,000 (USD), represents 20% of his net worth. He owns the properties 
outright and is not subject to influence by any foreign financial entities. Neither Applicant 
nor his foreign family members are financially dependent on the income generated by 
the properties. Given these facts and the nature of the Senegalese government, it is 
unlikely that the assets will result in a conflict or effectively be used to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure him. In comparison, Applicant has approximately $660,000 in 
U.S.-based assets, which include his home, retirement savings, and other financial 
assets. His debt, including his mortgage loan is approximately $102,000. He earns 
almost $200,000 annually from his employment with a U.S.-based company. Given 
Applicant’s choice to pursue U.S. citizenship and his significant financial ties to the 
United States, he is likely to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.32  
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Although Applicant has strong ties to Senegal and 
some familial ties to France, the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate any 
foreign preference and foreign influence concerns. On his own, Applicant identified a 
potential conflict of interest between his full-time employment on a federal contract and 
his part-time employment and resolved that conflict in favor or U.S. interests. In doing 
so, he has demonstrated that he takes the concerns and responsibilities of being a 
clearance holder seriously and that he can be expected to act in accordance with U.S. 
interests in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.p:    For Applicant 
                                                          
30 AG 8(a).  
 
31 AG ¶ 8(c).  
 
32 AG ¶ 8(f).  
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
