 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02612 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines E, M, and K. The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 6, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 12, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 20, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented two 
sets of documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, and admitted 
into evidence. The record was left open until April 17, 2018, for receipt of additional 
 
2 
 
documentation. On April 17, 2018, Applicant offered AppX C, which was also admitted 
into evidence.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 28, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a., and 2.b. He denied SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a., and 3.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (TR at page 18 line 
23 to page 19 line 9, and GX 1 at page 5.) He has been employed with the defense 
contractor since “April of” 2017. (GX 1 at page 5.) Applicant was terminated by his prior 
employer in September of 2015 for “Policy Violations,” that will be discussed at length, 
below. (GX 3.) He served in the Marine Corp from 2000~2006, achieving the rank of 
Sergeant. (AppX C at page 3.) 
  
Guideline M - Use of Information Technology, Guideline K - Handling Protected 
Information & Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
 1.a., 2.a. and 2.b. Applicant admits that at his prior employment he installed 
unauthorized software, a Mouse Jiggler,” which prevented his “screen from locking out.” 
(TR at page 24 line 23 to page 31 line 6.) He avers that he was “unaware that it was 
unauthorized,” as he was introduced to it “by a senior administrator that(sic) was acting 
as a mentor to . . . [Applicant] at that time.” (Id, and TR at page 84 lines 4~17.) Applicant 
has offered five undated letters of support from those he works with at his current 
employer, but nothing to corroborate averment regarding the unauthorized software. 
 
 1.a., and 3.a. Applicant denies that he created five administrated accounts, some 
in the names of coworkers, on a classified system without approval. (TR at page 31 line 
7 to page 45 line 8, at pages 50 line 15 to page 51 line 3, and at page 55 line 11 to page 
68 line 5.) He avers this misconduct was authorized. (TR at page 83 line 25 to page 84 
line 3.) However, Applicant has submitted nothing further in support of his averment. 
 
 1.a. Applicant denies that he falsified his time card over a seven day period. (TR 
at page 45 line 19 to page 50 line 14.) His “Desktop’ was monitored by his employer for 
seven of a planned ten days. (AppX A at page 1.) During this period, Applicant “spent” 
the majority of his “Active Time on Non-Work related activities . . . included doing 
homework, browsing online retailers, and watching YouTube videos.” (Id.) I find that this 
was a clear misuse of information technology. 
  
Policies 
 
  When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M - Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
 
4 
 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized 
 
 Applicant downloaded an unauthorized Mouse Jiggler on his employer’s laptop. 
This conduct is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness; 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel; and 
 
d) the misuse was due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions. 
 
 None of these apply. This deliberate manipulation of his employer’s 
information technology system was intentional, not authorized, and occurred only 
about two and a half years prior to his hearing. Guideline M is found against 
Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Guideline K - Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information is set 
out in AG ¶ 33:  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt 
about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security 
concern. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 34. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant created five administrative accounts in the names of colleagues on his 
classified system without approval. This conduct is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no evidence of 
compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 Again, none of these apply. Although his misconduct occurred more than two 
years ago; I can’t overlook the fact that it was deliberate and intentional, and Applicant 
shows no remorse for said conduct. Guideline K is found against Applicant.   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under  
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
  Applicant has a demonstrated pattern of rule violations. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
 
7 
 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 None of these apply. Applicant falsified his time cards, downloaded unauthorized 
software, and created unauthorized administrative accounts. What is most troubling is 
that Applicant shows little or no remorse for his Personal Conduct. Guideline E is found 
against Applicant.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines M, K, and E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is well respected with 
his current employer. (AppX C.) However given his pattern of rule violations, overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated/failed to mitigate the Use of Information Technology, Handling Protected 
Information, and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
