1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03051 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct), K (Handling Protected Information), and M (Use of Information Technology). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 11, 2014. 
On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines E, K, and M.1 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 15, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2018. The 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
02/15/2019
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 1, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened on August 29, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing, but did 
not introduce any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old contracts manager for a defense contractor, employed 
since 2014. He previously worked for another defense contractor from 2009 until he was 
laid off in 2013. Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 1980. He married in 1982 and 
has two adult children. He held a DOD security clearance for 30 years before he was laid 
off in 2013. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant copied company proprietary 
files after being notified that he was selected for layoff. When confronted, he denied 
having the files, until he admitted copying them after repeated questioning. Applicant also 
falsified material facts presented to a Government investigator regarding this incident. 
The incident described in SOR ¶ 1.a is cross-alleged under Guidelines K and M. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied intentionally copying the 661 files, and that it was 
not his intent to do so. Rather, he intended to copy examples of his work for use in finding 
another job, as he was in a “panic mode.” He noted that he had permission to work from 
home and that the Government investigator was “misleading.” The Government’s 
evidence is sufficient to establish the SOR allegations. 
 
On August 1, 2013, Applicant was notified that he was selected for layoff. He was 
notified not to have contact with company customers during the transition. The company 
began to monitor his work computer. Subsequently, Applicant removed three boxes from 
the office and composed an email to the contracts team and copied the customer. On 
Sunday, August 4, 2013, Applicant accessed the company computer system remotely, 
deleted certain data and copied 661 files to his personal thumb drive. The files were 
contract related information, including sensitive company financial information and 
proprietary information including contracts, contract negotiation information, and attorney 
work-product. 
 
On August 8, 2013, Applicant met with company human resources and security 
personnel. He signed several statements affirming that he was not in possession of 
company proprietary information and electronic media. He was asked three times if he 
had any company data in his possession, and Applicant denied it each time. The fourth 
time, he admitted he may have information he copied for the transition. When the list of 
661 files was presented to him, he admitted he had copied the files for “reference” 
purposes. He returned the thumb drive as directed. 
 
When interviewed by a Government investigator in 2015, Applicant claimed he 
copied files with his supervisor’s permission over a period of time to a company thumb 
drive and he was unaware of making any false statements to company personnel. 
 
3 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he generally denied any wrongdoing with regard 
to copying documents, and claimed the Government investigator was “misleading.” He 
stated that he was focused on getting his job done, and when he lost use of a company 
issued thumb drive, he used his personal thumb drive, and he did not remember that until 
he was confronted with specifics. He apologized for his actions and stated that “what I did 
after I lost my job was really stupid, and the only excuse I can offer is my state of mind at 
the time.” 
 
During the hearing in this case, Applicant admitted that he did things he should not 
have, including taking company documents that were useful to his new job and was 
deceptive to the company. However, Applicant also testified that the he did not take files 
for an improper purpose and denied having company proprietary information. When 
questioned, he admitted having company foreign contracts and attorney-client 
information. He also stated that he forgot the thumb drive was in his possession when 
confronted by the company, and claimed that he copied documents routinely as part of 
his work, but could not remember if he had a company laptop or a way to connect to the 
company computer system when away from work. He has not sought counseling to 
address this issue. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
 
5 
 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information . . .;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s 
time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes:  
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The personal conduct alleged is generally sufficient to implicate 
AG ¶¶ 16 (a), (b), (d), and (e). 
 
Guideline E includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and 
found that none are fully applicable in this case.  
I find that Applicant willfully copied 661 company documents without permission, 
and repeatedly lied to his employer before returning them. He also lied and was vague 
when answering questions related to this incident when interviewed by a Government 
investigator and when testifying at his hearing in this case. Applicant has not fully 
 
6 
 
apologized, but he continues to equivocate about his intent and the substance of the 
copied documents. He intentionally failed to cooperate when confronted by the company 
or Government investigator, and gave false and evasive answers. He has not sought 
counseling. Based on Applicant’s significant loss of judgment, secretive nature of his 
actions, and failure to admit his possession of the files, even after being confronted, 
affirms his questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty and unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. I am not convinced that this incident is behind him or that 
similar intentional conduct will not recur. No mitigation fully applies. 
Guideline K: Handling Protected Information 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the handling protected information security concern: 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Relevant conditions that could raise a security concern under AG ¶ 34 and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, storing, transmitting, or otherwise handling 
protected information, including images, on any unauthorized equipment or 
medium; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 The evidence presented is sufficient to raise the security concerns described 
above.  
 
Guideline K includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
incidents regarding handling protected information. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 35. The findings of fact, discussion and reasoning under Guideline 
E, above, apply equally to the concerns raised under Guideline K, and are incorporated 
herein. I find no mitigating condition under Guideline K is fully applicable to Applicant’s 
conduct. 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline M: Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems: 
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. 
 
Relevant conditions that could raise a security concern under AG ¶ 40 and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, or 
other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system;  
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized. 
 
The evidence presented is sufficient to raise the security concerns described 
above. 
 
Guideline M includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
incidents regarding use of information technology. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 35. The findings of fact, discussion and reasoning under Guideline 
E, above, apply equally to the concerns raised under Guideline M, and are incorporated 
herein. I find no mitigating condition under Guideline M is fully applicable to Applicant’s 
conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
8 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guidelines E, K, and M, in my whole-person analysis. I also 
considered Applicant’s long history of employment and security eligibility. However, his 
intentional actions to copy protected information for his personal use in another position, 
falsifying his actions when confronted, and falsifying and equivocating his involvement to 
a Government investigator and in his hearing, shows a complete lack of judgment, 
honesty, and trustworthiness expected of a person entrusted with national security 
eligibility. I remain unconvinced that this incident is behind him and will not recur. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s security clearance is denied. 
 
 
   _______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
