1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03264 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On June 13, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on the same 
day. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 18, 2019. The Government offered 
02/14/2019
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript on January 31, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He has never married and has no children. He attended 
a trade school for four years and attended college for two years, but did not earn a degree. 
He enlisted in the military, but after a short period he was honorably discharged due to 
medical reasons. He has worked for government contractors at different times in the 
past.1  
 
Applicant disagreed with the hiring practices of his employer (Employer #1). In 
approximately September 2016, he believed he was asked to do a job he was not hired 
for. He went to the personnel office and complained. He claimed that personnel at the 
company did not like him criticizing them for what he believed were inappropriate work 
practices. He explained a manager had asked him if he liked working there and Applicant 
responded that it was acceptable. Applicant stated: 
 
And at that time, the black guy walked up, and I guess he thought I was 
talking about him. And they marched off, and that’s when, I guess, that-- 
when he decided to fire me. But I didn’t – like I said, they didn’t like me 
having meetings with them and expressing what I felt. It seems like a lot of 
managers, they’re job scared, and they want cheap, Bosnians or Indians or 
Africans working for them, because they can pay them $3-or $400 every 
two weeks or whatever. And they don’t bitch and they don’t bellyache; they 
will not challenge you.2 
 
* * * 
 
And that’s what really stuck in their craw is whenever I had meetings with 
them about this. You know, I hired in to do a specific job. Our soldiers 
deserve English-speaking, licensed American craftsman.3 
 
 Applicant testified that he was accused of insubordination by the manager. He 
denied it. He stated he received a letter “something about behavior” and verbal 
harassment. He said the managers can make up any reason to fire you. He said if you 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-18. 
 
2 Tr. 23. 
 
3 Tr. 23. 
 
3 
 
 
disagree with them they get angry. The letter notified him of his termination.4 Applicant’s 
termination letter from Employer #1 stated: 
 
Your employment is terminated because you violated several discipline 
policies including failure to comply with [employer’s] Code of Ethics and 
Business Conduct. You violated [employer’s] Harassment-Free Workplace 
policy by engaging in verbal harassment or other abusive conduct, including 
bullying, tormenting, aggressive, and/or tyrannizing behavior. You violated 
[employer’s] Workplace Security by not maintaining a safe and respectful 
workplace by engaging in threatening, frightening, coercive, and/or violent 
behavior. You also violated employment addendum, Section 24.2, by not 
complying with all [employer’s] standards of business conduct, ethics, 
security, and health and safety rules and directives.5 
 
 During Applicant’s January 2017 background interview, he told the government 
investigator that he was told by his manager that he was sent home from his employment 
for being a bully. No further amplification about his conduct was provided by Applicant.6  
 
 Applicant was terminated from employment in October 2004 by Employer #2 for 
engaging in a physical altercation with another employee, in violation of company policy.7 
Applicant testified he disagreed with another employee’s work product and engaged in a 
physical altercation with the employee. He explained that his concerns were about safety. 
He was asked by his manager if he knew why he was being fired, and Applicant stated it 
was because of his concerns about safety. He then said the manager told him he was 
fired for fighting.8  
 
 Applicant testified that he was rehired by Employer #2 several years later. As part 
of the hiring practice, the employer asked him to provide a resume. Applicant failed to list 
on his resume his previous employment with Employer #2. He testified that he did not 
have an explanation for why the resume did not include his previous employment with 
Employer #2.9  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 20-26; GE 3, 4. 
 
5 GE 4. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 26-33. 
 
9 Tr. 52-59; GE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in October 2010. In it 
he failed to disclose, as was required, he had been fired by Employer #2 for fighting.10 He 
explained “Well, you know, I feel like I got screwed over on those jobs, and I judge—I 
don’t’ know. I just put finished, done with it, you know.”11 He further explained “I was fired, 
but the reason why I got fired, I feel like, were unjust.”12 
 
 Applicant completed another SCA in February 2016. In response to questions in 
Section 13A about his employment history, he stated he left his job with Employer #2 in 
December 2005 because the job was finished, which was not true. He was fired by 
Employer #2 in October 2004 for a physical altercation.13  
 
 Applicant’s provided the following explanation for providing false information on his 
2016 SCA.   
 
I put down, [f]inished, instead of fight. I was finished because whenever I 
think about the situation and how I was trying to defend my integrity—a lot 
of soldiers were getting electrocuted back in the—when they was taking 
showers . . . .”14 
 
He then stated: “I don’t know what it was. Fired, quit, finished, resigned. I don’t remember 
what it was. But, yes, I was fired.”15 He further explained:  
 
 Well, I was thinking about it, and I was hacked off because I got screwed 
over, trying to do the right thing. I could have got—that was a $100,000 a 
year job. Okay? When it comes to integrity or doing something funny, you 
can’t be bought. Some people mostly get bought. They’re job scared or 
house note or family or whatever. Integrity’s integrity, period.16 
 
 During Applicant’s January 2017 interview with a government investigator he was 
questioned about his employment with Employer #2. Applicant stated that he did not know 
why he did not disclose that he was fired and indicated that maybe it was because he 
                                                          
10 Tr. 50GE 2. Any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when applying mitigating conditions, when making a 
credibility determination, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
11 Tr. 50. 
 
12 Tr. 50. 
 
13 GE 1. 
 
14 Tr. 46. 
 
15 Tr. 48. 
 
16 Tr. 48. 
 
 
5 
 
 
misread the question.17 I find Applicant deliberately provided false information on his 2016 
SCA when he stated that he left his employment with Employer #2 in December 2005 
because the job had finished, when in fact he was terminated in 2004 for fighting.  
 
 In April 2015, Applicant was charged with assault after he hit a salesman at a car 
dealership because he believed the engine in the used van he purchased was bad. 
Applicant explained that he decided to purchase a used van. He test drove it and had his 
mechanic examine it. His mechanic told him it “had a slight miss.”18 Applicant then 
purchased the vehicle. He then took it back to the mechanic and it was determined that 
there was a problem with a cylinder, which was an expensive repair. Applicant claimed a 
person at the dealership agreed to share the cost of the repair and then did not. He 
confronted the salesman and asked “Where’s my money.” Applicant then hit the salesman 
in the face. Applicant was charged with assault. He said he received a letter from the 
district attorney that the charge was dismissed because witnesses would not cooperate.19  
 
 Applicant filed a suit in small claims court against the car dealership. He said: “I 
explained to the Judge, a verbal agreement made in good faith is just as binding as a 
signed contract, period.”20 The Judge disagreed with Applicant’s interpretation of the law 
and ruled in favor of the dealership. Applicant was unhappy and frustrated. He testified at 
his security clearance hearing as follows: 
 
Administrative Judge: You hit the guy? 
 
Applicant: Yes. I slapped him. Yes. 
 
Administrative Judge: And that’s okay? 
 
Applicant: When somebody lies to you— 
 
Administrative Judge: You get to hit them? 
 
Applicant: Well, we’re not computers. We are – 
 
Administrative Judge: I am asking you. We’re also civilized human beings, so you hit this 
person. 
 
Applicant: I will protect my home. 
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. This wasn’t your home. 
                                                          
17 GE 3. 
 
18 Tr. 33. 
 
19 GE 7; Tr. 33-40. 
 
20 Tr. 36.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant: I will protect my integrity. I will protect whatever—you know, I’m not— 
 
Administrative Judge: And the way you choose to do that is by assaulting somebody? 
 
Applicant: Well, whenever somebody lies to me or tries to cheat me. 
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. So but— 
 
Applicant: People don’t –there’s a lot of bad people out there. There are a lot of bad 
people.  
 
Administrative Judge: I agree. 
 
Applicant: And if nobody respects you, you know, then you have to ---it’s all about respect.  
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. And so— 
 
Applicant: It’s about being civil. 
 
Administrative Judge: And being civil is assaulting someone because you disagree with 
them.  
 
Applicant: I didn’t disagree with them. I was cheated.  
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. You went to court, and you lost. 
 
Applicant: Huh? 
 
Administrative Judge: You went to court and you lost. 
 
Applicant: Well, that’s beside the ---well, the point is, I was cheated. 
 
Administrative Judge: All right. 
 
Applicant: I know I was cheated. Nobody else was there except me. I have to preserve—
it’s just the same thing as electrical or whatever. I have to preserve an integrity. 
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. 
 
Applicant: Boundaries, respect. It’s about about—that’s what all of this is about. 
 
Administrative Judge: And do you respect the law? 
 
Applicant: Yes. I didn’t break the law. The point is— 
 
Administrative Judge: Well— 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant: Well, the point—I understand what you— 
 
Administrative Judge: No, no. Assaulting people is breaking the law.  
 
Applicant: There’s reasons for—there are reasons for--- 
 
Administrative Judge: No reason justifies you assaulting someone because you disagree 
with them. 
 
Applicant: No. If somebody comes into my house, do you think I’m going to just sit there 
and let somebody—if somebody comes and and – 
 
Administrative Judge: I didn’t say that. 
 
Applicant: steals something.  
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. Go ahead. Finish what you want to tell me. Go ahead.  
 
Applicant: I already forgot what I was even talking – 
 
Administrative Judge: Well, you were cheated, and you— 
 
Applicant: Yes. 
 
Administrative Judge: decided that you needed to assault him, because you were- 
 
Applicant: No. I decided to provide— 
 
Administrative Judge: protecting your integrity. 
 
Applicant: motivation for them to keep—to be honest. 
 
Administrative Judge: Okay. And the motivation is hitting them? 
 
Applicant: Because they didn’t pay me.  
 
Administrative Judge: Okay.21  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
21 Tr. 33-45. 
 
8 
 
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwilling to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This includes, but is 
not limited to, considerations of: . . . (2) any disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant was terminated from his job by Employer #2 in 2004 for fighting. He 
deliberately provided false information on his SCA when he stated he left the job in 
December 2005 because the job was finished. Applicant was fired from his job by 
Employer #1 in about September 2016 for violating his employer’s workplace 
harassment-free workplace policy when he engaged in verbal harassment or other 
abusive conduct. He violated his employer’s security policy by not maintaining a safe and 
respectful workplace. In 2015, Applicant assaulted a salesman by hitting him in the face. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant’s testimony lacked candor and was not believable. He failed to make a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct his false statement on his 2016 SCA and disclose he 
had been fired from his job in 2004. His justifications for why he did not disclose the truth 
raise serious concerns about his trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. AG ¶ 17(a) 
does not apply. 
 
Applicant repeatedly acted out aggressively or violently in the workplace and when 
he was unhappy as a consumer. Fighting in the workplace, exhibiting aggressive or 
offensive conduct towards coworkers, and hitting someone in the face when he was 
unhappy and frustrated with a purchase are not minor and show a pattern of questionable 
self-control and conduct. Applicant failed to take responsibility for any of his actions. I 
cannot find that similar conduct is unlikely to recur. I find his conduct casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
11 
 
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He has a history of acting aggressively and 
inappropriately in the workplace. He believes he is entitled to use violence to motivate 
people to act as he believes is appropriate. He repeatedly justifies his actions because 
he is defending his integrity. Applicant’s misguided interpretation of appropriate conduct, 
both physical and verbal; his deliberate falsification on his 2016 SCA; his failure to 
disclose his termination from his job on his 2010 SCA; and his failure to disclose on his 
resume a period of employment that might have been detrimental to his hiring, show a 
pattern of deception, dishonesty, and questionable judgment. His conduct casts doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
