1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-04310 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 14, 2016. On 
March 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 1, 2018, scheduling the 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) were revised effective June 8, 2017, and apply herein. 
02/06/2019
 
2 
 
hearing for August 30, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D were admitted without objection. Post hearing, 
supplemental Applicant exhibits AE E through G were offered in evidence and were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 10, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old senior electrical engineer, employed by a defense 
contractor since 1986. He married in 1987 and separated in July 2015. He shares custody 
of two children, 18 and 14 years old. He currently holds a top secret security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant is delinquent on seven consumer debts totaling 
approximately $30,500; failed to file Federal tax returns for 2013, 2014, 2016 and 2017; 
and is delinquent on approximately $13,137 in Federal income taxes for tax years 2015 
and 2016. The SOR allegations are supported by substantial evidence. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations except he disputed the amount owed in SOR 
¶ 1.a, and noted that he filed his 2013 and 2014 tax returns, but he had not filed his 2016 
and 2017 tax returns as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
 
Applicant separated from his spouse, moved from the house, and filed for divorce 
but never completed the process due to attorney costs. He paid about $5,000 in attorney 
fees in 2015 and 2016. Marital debts were not divided, but a temporary order was filed in 
2015 regarding the parties’ rights and obligations with respect to the children. Applicant 
pays child and spouse support totaling about $2,400 per month, and he pays his spouse’s 
home utilities and insurance costs. He began to accumulate debts in 2015 and 2016 due 
to the costs of separation and divorce proceedings. In 2018, Applicant borrowed about 
$40,000 from his 401k retirement plan. The home occupied by his spouse is paid, and he 
is renting a home for himself. Applicant disclosed that he is delinquent on debts not listed 
in the SOR, and is paying on two auto loans, including his spouse’s car. 
 
Applicant testified that he filed his 2014 and 2015 taxes when due, but did not file 
the 2016 or 2017 returns on time because he did not have sufficient income to pay the 
taxes owed.2 When he started to file tax returns as a single filer, his tax liability 
substantially increased. After the hearing, Applicant submitted a letter from the IRS 
accepting his offer to pay his 2015 and 2016 tax arrearage of $6,053, by December 22, 
2018. However, at the hearing, Applicant was unsure of how he could raise sufficient 
funds to pay the tax arrearage. He stated that he has about $1,500 net remainder each 
month, but “something always comes up.” He noted he had about $150 in his checking 
and savings accounts. No evidence of final satisfaction of the tax debt was provided. 
 
                                                     
2 Applicant testified that he has already paid about $36,000 in 2018, to cover taxes owed for 2016 and 
2017. AE C shows IRS transcripts showing payments of $24,681 with Applicant’s 2016 and 2017 tax 
returns. The 2016 return was filed in May 2018, and the 2017 return was filed on time in April 2018. 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a 2017 judgment owed to a credit card company for $10,861. 
Applicant agreed to a post-judgment settlement to pay a total of $5,000 in monthly 
payments beginning in September 2017. At the hearing, Applicant stated that he hired an 
attorney to settle the debt and to work on other delinquent debts. Applicant agreed to pay 
$416 per month until August 2018, but at the hearing, he stated that he was late in making 
payments and was behind about $2,500. No evidence of final satisfaction of the debt has 
been provided. Applicant testified that consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.g have 
not been resolved, but he intended to ask his attorney to work with the creditors. Post 
hearing, Applicant provided a letter from his attorney, indicating that she proposed waiting 
for lawsuits before settling debts, but that she could pursue them prior to litigation if 
Applicant preferred. No evidence of substantial progress toward resolution of the debts 
has been provided. 
 
Applicant described himself as a mentor at his employment who started new 
initiatives. Applicant has not sought financial counseling. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
 
4 
 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant suffered a financial setback after separating from his spouse. His debts 
are long-standing and Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances to 
adequately address his debts, especially before his security clearance hearing. He has 
been generally unable to pay or resolve delinquent debts listed in the SOR, and additional 
debts not listed have become delinquent. In addition, he failed to file his 2016 Federal tax 
return when due, and owes Federal taxes for 2015 and 2016.  
 
Applicant hired an attorney to negotiate a settlement on a judgment from a credit 
card company, but failed to comply with the terms and has not shown that the debt is 
resolved. He has also asked his attorney for assistance with the remaining SOR debts, 
but has not followed-up on significant and conclusive actions to resolve them. Prior to his 
hearing, Applicant submitted an offer to pay his Federal tax debt by the end of 2018. The 
 
6 
 
offer was accepted by the IRS in August 2018, but Applicant testified that he was unlikely 
able to pay the debt, and has not offered evidence that the debt was satisfied. 
 
Applicant’s financial status was clearly impacted by his marital problems beginning 
in 2015, however he has not shown that his financial situation is unlikely to recur, or that 
he has initiated good-faith efforts to repay his creditors or resolve his debts. I am not 
convinced that Applicant has an effective plan to regain control of his finances. He has 
not sought financial counseling to effectively budget his financial future, and he has not 
shown an ability, intent, or willingness to significantly address his delinquent debts in a 
timely manner. 
 
Overall, I find that Applicant has a history of financial distress, and has not 
adequately addressed his financial and tax obligations, nor has he shown the level of 
financial responsibility expected of individuals holding security eligibility. I find that his 
financial status is not under control and, and that similar problems may recur given the 
financial course he is on. AG ¶¶ 20 (b) and (g) are partially applicable but these and the 
remaining mitigating conditions are not sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by his 
history of financial issues and current status. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).3 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s marital 
issues, additional financial obligations, and long-standing employment and security 
eligibility are noted, however, they do not overcome his unresolved financial and tax 
delinquencies, inability to adequately address his debts over the last three years, and 
exhibited history of financial distress. 
 
                                                     
3 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
