1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04338 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline B, foreign influence. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2018. The Defense 
02/06/2019
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 11, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 17, 2019. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
K. There were no objections to any exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript on January 28, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice and Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶ 1.c. Department Counsel submitted HE II, a 
written request that I take administrative notice of certain facts about the Philippines. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government 
publications.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the allegation 
in SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1988. He was 
married and divorced twice from 1997 to 2003. There were no children from the 
marriages. He remarried in 2012 and has children, ages five years old and 21 months. 
He has worked for the same federal contractor since 1988.3 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 
2016 and owed past-due federal income taxes.4  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in February 2015. He 
disclosed that he failed to timely file his 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011 federal income 
tax returns. He stated: “I am currently working to file federal taxes for 2007.”5 He repeated 
this statement for each of the tax years he disclosed and stated he estimated owing $500 
for each year. He did not disclose he failed to timely file federal income tax returns for 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I (HE) is a demonstrative exhibit provided by Government Counsel. 
 
2 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit II. 
 
3 Tr. 21-24; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 25; GE 1, 2, 3; AE A through K. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
2012, 2013 and 2014. He testified he could not recall why he failed to disclose the other 
tax years. At that time his 2015 federal income tax return was not yet due.6  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in November 2015. He 
disclosed that in September 2015 he filed his 2007 through 2011 federal income tax 
returns. He explained that these tax returns were not timely filed because he was lazy 
and did not realize he owed money. He was unaware at that time of the total amount he 
owed, but stated that he would possibly set up a payment plan. He initially hired a 
professional tax consultant firm to help him, but it went bankrupt.7  
 
Applicant testified that he mailed his 2007, 2008, and 2009 federal tax returns in 
2015 and he never heard back from the IRS and the returns were not processed. He said 
he called the IRS frequently to find out the returns’ status. 8 
 
 Applicant completed government interrogatories.9 In response to inquiries, he 
explained that he failed to file his 2007 through 2011 federal income tax returns. He said 
he did not realize at the time that he owed taxes. He stated: “There is not a real reason 
for not filing other then I had been burning myself in my work.”10 He stated he had met 
with the IRS in December 2016 about negotiating a payment plan or settlement. There 
was an error in his 2007 return so he was told it needed to be corrected and resubmitted. 
He explained his plan was to hire a tax attorney to complete his taxes, resubmit his 2007 
return and negotiate a settlement. He provided the first page of his 2008, 2009 and 2010 
IRS 1040 forms that only included his income and no other information. They were 
stamped by the IRS on December 13, 2016.11 
 
 Applicant completed additional government interrogatories in April 2018. He 
explained he submitted tax documents to the IRS three weeks prior to his government 
interview, but the IRS had not received his submission. He resubmitted tax documents in 
person at an IRS office. He said all of his tax documents were accepted except for tax 
year 2007 because it was missing a document. He resubmitted it, and he said his 2007 
tax return was being processed to determine his tax liability. Applicant provided the first 
                                                          
6 Tr. 28-30; GE 1. I have not considered any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR for 
disqualifying purposes. I may consider such information when making a credibility determination, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in a whole-person analysis.  
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. 32. 
 
9 Applicant dated his response to the Government’s August 2016 interrogatories as October 11, 2016. 
However, in his narrative response he provided dates he made contact with the IRS as December 2016, 
which would have occurred after the date he signed his interrogatories.  
 
10 GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. 34-35; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
page of his 2007 IRS 1040 that was stamped on January 24, 2016. The second page 
shows that it was prepared on January 19, 2018, by a tax preparer.12  
 
 IRS transcripts confirmed that Applicant submitted a 2007 IRS 1040 form in 
January 2016, and it was filed in January 2018. Substitute tax returns were prepared by 
the IRS for tax year 2008 in May 2010 and for tax year 2009 in August 2011. Applicant 
submitted his federal income tax returns to the IRS for tax year 2010 in December 2016; 
tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were all filed in January 2018. 
Applicant’s annual income for tax years 2008 to 2016 ranged from $98,000 to $130,000. 
He was not married in 2007 through 2011.13  
 
 Applicant testified that he was dedicated to his work and did not practice due 
diligence in timely completing his federal income tax returns. He said he had been working 
with a professional tax consultant firm in 2012, but it went bankrupt. He said after that he 
was missing documents. He understood he had a duty to file his tax returns. He kept 
getting busy and delayed filing his tax returns. He said he was unable to retrieve from the 
IRS tax transcripts for 2007 and 2008, because they were too old. He said the reason he 
failed to timely file his 2011 through 2016 federal tax returns was because he was trying 
to get a tax number for his wife. He was told by the IRS that he was due refunds for certain 
tax years, and he should wait for all of the delinquent years to be processed. Applicant 
testified that refunds he was entitled to for tax years 2012 through 2016, were applied to 
the federal income taxes he owed for tax years 2006, 2007, and 2008. In May 2018, he 
withdrew money from his pension plan, paid the penalty, and paid the federal income 
taxes he owed for tax years 2009, 2010 and 2011. Applicant provided an IRS document 
that shows he has a zero balance as of January 2019.14 
 
 Applicant was asked if he had timely filed his 2017 federal income tax return, which 
was due on April 15, 2018. He did not. He stated he filed it about three weeks before his 
hearing. He did not file an extension. He did not have an explanation for his failure to 
timely file his 2017 federal income tax return. He stated “It was a credit, I didn’t owe”. He 
testified that he promised he would file his tax returns on time in the future.15  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law was born in the Philippines. She became a permanent 
resident of the United States in September 2015. She was sponsored by Applicant’s 
wife’s sister and her husband, who are U.S. citizens. Applicant’s mother-in-law has 
returned to the Philippines for several months since acquiring her permanent resident 
status, but has not returned there since 2017. She works as a child care provider and is 
                                                          
12 GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 36-38; AE D through K. 
 
14 Tr. 25, 39-48; AE C.  
 
15 Tr. 48-51. 
 
 
5 
 
 
self-sufficient. Applicant and his wife do not provide her financial support. Applicant’s 
mother-in-law has family that lives in the Philippines.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
16 Tr. 52-78; AE A, B. 
 
6 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 
2016. He owed a substantial tax debt that was past due. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file federal income tax returns for ten years. He owed a 
significant tax debt. He completed an SCA in February 2015 and disclosed some of the 
tax years he failed to file returns, but not all of them. After being put on notice about that 
his failure to timely file tax returns was a security concern, he failed to timely file his 2016 
and 2017 federal income tax return. Applicant owed federal income taxes for numerous 
tax years that were not paid until May 2018. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s repeated failure to pay his federal taxes 
and file his federal income tax returns casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his failure to timely file his federal income tax returns to being 
lazy and working hard. He did not think he owed taxes. He also attributed his failure to 
timely file during the later years to not having a tax number for his wife. These factors did 
not impact Applicant’s ability to comply with tax laws and obligations. These factors were 
not beyond Applicant’s control. Even if he could not obtain a tax number for his wife for 
one year, it does not explain why this was not corrected in subsequent years. It also did 
not prevent him from filing his tax returns. Applicant’s eventual resolution of his delinquent 
tax filings and payment of his overdue taxes years after they were due does not show he 
acted responsibly. Even after he was put on notice about the security concerns, he did 
not act responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has filed his delinquent federal income tax returns and paid his past-due 
federal taxes. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(g) apply. I cannot find that Applicant’s eventual 
payment of his federal income taxes years after they were due and only after his security 
clearance became an issue constitutes a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of the Philippines and has been permanent 
resident of the United States since 2015. She was sponsored by Applicant’s sister-in-law 
and brother-in-law. His mother-in-law is employed in the United States and is self-
sufficient. I do not find there is a heightened risk or a potential for foreign influence. I find 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply. I find in Applicant’s favor under the Guideline B security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. His mother-in-law is a citizen of the Philippines and a 
permanent resident of the United States since 2015. She lives in the U.S., is employed, 
and is self-sufficient. I did not find any disqualifying conditions applied and find in 
Applicant’s favor under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Applicant has been employed by the same federal contractor since 1986. He failed 
to timely file his 2007 through 2016 federal income tax returns. Even after he was aware 
of the seriousness of his conduct in 2015, he failed to timely file his federal income tax 
returns for 2016 and again in 2017. The fact that years later he finally completed his legal 
obligations does not show he exercises good judgment and is reliable. The DOHA Appeal 
Board has held that:  
 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 17 
 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant’s history of non-compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to timely 
file and pay his federal income taxes raises serious security concerns. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
