1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 17-01075 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 7, 2015. On 
June 13, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2018, and requested a decision on the 
written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
02/25/2019
2 
 
case on September 24, 2018. In her submission, Department Counsel amended the SOR 
by withdrawing SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f. On September 25, 2018, a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on November 15, 2018, and did not respond. The case 
was assigned to me on February 12, 2019.  
 
The FORM included summaries of personal subject interviews (PSI) conducted on 
July 13, August 25, September 27, October 28, November 18, and December 29, 2016 
(FORM Item 10). The PSI summaries were not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the 
accuracy of the PSI summaries; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; 
or object to consideration of the PSI summaries on the ground that they were not 
authenticated. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI summaries by failing 
to respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, 
they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the 
Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old messaging analyst employed by a defense contractor 
since April 2015. He worked for federal contractors from November 2000 to November 
2005, was unemployed from November 2005 to December 2006, and worked for federal 
contractors from December 2006 to December 2007, November 2009 to October 2011, 
and November 2011 to mid-2013. He left his job as a federal contractor in 2013, because 
he had not completed required training. (FORM Item 10 at 3.) He has worked 
intermittently as an independent contractor since April 1998. When he has a full-time job, 
he works as an independent contractor on weekends. (FORM Item 10 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant is a high school graduate. He has never married and has no children. He 
has held a security clearance since at least November 1998 (FORM Item 10 at 5.)  
 
 The SOR, as amended, alleges six delinquent debts reflected in credit reports from 
April 2015 (FORM Item 9), February 2017 (FORM Item 7), and September 2018 (FORM 
Item 6). The evidence concerning these delinquent debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: mortgage loan past due for $16,834, in foreclosure with balance 
of $271,350. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence of the status of this debt. The 
September 2018 credit report reflects that the last payment on this debt was in July 2017. 
It is not resolved. 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 5) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: home-improvement loan charged off for $33,381. In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated that he had an agreement to pay $50 per month on this 
account. The September 2018 credit report reflects that the last payment on this debt was 
in August 2017. He did not provide any documentary evidence of a payment agreement 
or payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: credit-card account charged off for $10,327. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant stated that he had a payment agreement providing for monthly $195 
payments. The September 2018 credit report reflects that the last payment on this debt 
was in July 2017. He did not provide any documentary evidence of a payment agreement 
or payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: withdrawn. This debt was resolved before Applicant submitted his 
answer to the SOR. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: judgment filed in 2016 for $7,962. This debt is for delinquent taxes. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his “tax person” is working to resolve or 
set up a payment agreement for this debt. It is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: withdrawn. This debt is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: debt to local government, placed for collection of $180. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he thought that this debt was a traffic ticket. In 
the August 2016 PSI, he stated that it was a delinquent utility bill. (FORM Item 10 at 6.) It 
is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: debt to fitness club, placed for collection of $125. In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated the collection account was closed and returned to the original 
creditor. He did not provide any documentary evidence showing that the debt is resolved. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “no” to all questions asking 
whether he had any financial delinquencies. He did not disclose any of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that all debts reflected in 
his credit report were paid off before he purchased his home and that, if he had any recent 
delinquent debts, he must have misread the question due to haste in completing the SCA. 
The credit reports reflect that his mortgage loan was opened in April 2016, about a year 
after he submitted his SCA. (FORM Item 6 at 2; FORM Item 7 at 1.)  
 
 Applicant submitted his SCA on April 7, 2015. The credit report from April 21, 2015 
reflected five delinquent debts: (1) a credit card that was past due for $1,365, on which 
the last activity was in October 2013; (2) a telecommunications account that was past due 
for $564, on which the last activity was in January 2014; (3) a telecommunications account 
that was past due for $238, on which the last activity was in October 2013; (4) a delinquent 
traffic ticket for $180, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g; and (5) a delinquent $125 debt to a fitness 
club, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.  
 
4 
 
 When Applicant was confronted with these debts during the August 2016 PSI, he 
told an investigator that he did not list these debts in his SCA because he paid the $238 
telecommunication bill in December 2015 and paid the other debts on specific dates he 
could not recall in 2015. (FORM Item 10 at 6-7.) The credit reports from February 2017 
and September 2018 reflected that the delinquent credit-card account and one of the two 
delinquent telecommunications accounts had been paid at some time after the April 2015 
credit report was issued, but the $564 telecommunications account and the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h were not resolved. (FORM Item 7 at 2.)  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to inadequate self-employment income 
when he was not employed full time between mid-2013 and April 2015. (FORM Item 10 
at 9.) He has not provided any specific information about his income and expenses during 
his period of unemployment, nor has he provided any specific information about his 
income and expenses since he began his current job in April 2015. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
5 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and 
6 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are recent, numerous, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. The record does not reflect whether Applicant’s 
failure to complete the training that was required for his continued employment in mid-
2013 was a condition largely beyond his control. Even if it was beyond his control, he has 
not acted responsibly. He resolved several delinquent debts after he submitted his SCA, 
apparently because the debts were impediments to qualifying for a mortgage loan. He 
has been employed full time for almost four years, but he produced no documentary 
evidence of significant actions to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 
and 1.h.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
7 
 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of education are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Based on the limited record, I am satisfied that Applicant knew he had delinquent 
debts when he submitted his SCA. His resolution of some of the debts shortly after 
submitting his SCA suggests that he did not list them in his SCA because he hoped to be 
able to pay them before they became a security-clearance issue. His resolution of the 
telecommunication bill in December 2015 reflects this state of mind at the time he 
submitted his SCA. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Applicant made no effort to correct the 
omissions in his SCA until he was confronted with them during the August 2016 PSI. His 
falsification is arguably infrequent, but it is recent and it is not “minor.” Falsification of a 
security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” 
ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant requested 
a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and falsification of 
his SCA. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.f:   Withdrawn 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
