 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04131 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on that 
same day, scheduling the hearing for August 1, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf, but presented no documentation. 
The record was left open until October 3, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. 
 
2 
 
Applicant submitted nothing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on 
August 9, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations of the SOR, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., 
1.f., 1.i., 1.l., and 1.q. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (TR at page 13 line 
2 to page 18 line 4, and GX 1 at pages 5 and12~13.) He has been employed, part time, 
with the defense contractor since about November of 2015. He is divorced, and has 
three children, two of which he is paying child support for. (TR at page 13 line 2 to page 
18 line 4.) He is homeless, and lives in his car. (TR at page 33 lines 15~21.) 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits a state tax lien to his former state of residence in the 
amount of about $553. (TR at page 18 line 11 to page 20 line 11.) Despite having two 
months to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard. This allegation 
is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denies that he has an outstanding judgment to Creditor B in the 
amount of about $1,828. (TR at page 20 line 12 to page 21 line 9.) As this outstanding 
judgment appears on the Government’s February 2016 credit report (CR); and as 
Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard, this allegation is found against 
Applicant. (GX 3 at page 3.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that he has a past-due debt to Creditor C in the amount of 
about $395. (TR at page 21 line 10 to page 22 line 6.) As he has submitted nothing 
further in this regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he has past-due child support payments totaling about 
$12,436. He avers that he is paying about $120 each month by way of garnishment to 
address this admitted debt. (TR at page 22 line 8 to page 24 line 12.) As Applicant has 
submitted nothing further in this regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e.  Applicant denies that he has a past-due debt to Creditor E in the amount of 
about $7,202. (TR at page 24 line 13 to page 25 line 7, and at page 25 line 24 to page 
26 line 7.) As this past-due debt appears on the Government’s October 2017 CR; and 
as Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard, this allegation is found against 
Applicant. (GX 4 at page 2.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant denies that he has a past-due debt to Creditor F in the amount of 
about $2,314. (TR at page 25 lines 8~23, and at page 26 lines 8~10.) As this past-due 
debt appears on the Government’s October 2017 CR; and as Applicant has submitted 
 
3 
 
nothing further in this regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. (GX 4 at page 
2.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admits that he has a past-due debt to Creditor G in the amount of 
about $2,058. (TR at page 26 lines 11~24.) As he has submitted nothing further in this 
regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.h and 1.j. Applicant admits that he has two past-due debts to Creditor H in an 
amount totaling about $1,766. (TR at page 26 line 25 to page 27 line 9, and at page 27 
line 20 to page 28 line 3.) As he has submitted nothing further in this regard, these 
allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.i. Applicant denies that he has a past-due debt to Creditor I in the amount of 
about $683. (TR at page 27 lines 10~19.) As this past-due debt appears on the 
Government’s October 2017 CR; and as Applicant has submitted nothing further in this 
regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. (GX 4 at page 2.) 
 
 1.k.~1.r. Applicant, at his hearing, now admits that he has eight past-due debts to 
eight separate creditors in an amount totaling about $20,021. (TR at page 28 line 4 to 
page 29 line 2, and at page 30 lines 4~11.) As he has submitted nothing further in this 
regard, these allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.s. and 1.t. Applicant admits that he has past-due student loans totaling about 
$80,000. (TR at page 30 line 12 to page 32 line 12.)  They were once in “forbearance”; 
and as such, he avers he will again seek forbearance. (Id.) As he has submitted nothing 
further in this regard, these allegations are found against Applicant. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
4 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a long history of 
delinquencies. His past-due indebtedness totals about $130,000. He has not 
demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has 
not been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant his eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.t.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
