1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-02517 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On September 21, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
(Exec. Or.); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
On November 11, 2017, Applicant, through his counsel at the time, responded to 
the SOR. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge at the Defense 
02/15/2019
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The attorney subsequently withdrew his 
appearance, and Applicant proceeded pro se. The case was originally assigned to 
another administrative judge, and on July 17, 2018, it was reassigned to me. On June 21, 
2018, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing on August 16, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits into evidence, which I marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6. These documents were previously mailed to Applicant’s 
former counsel, but he had not provided these documents to Applicant before he withdrew 
from the case. I adjourned the hearing for a period of time to give Applicant the opportunity 
to review the documents. After reviewing them, Applicant had no objection to the 
admission of these exhibits. Applicant testified and offered five exhibits into evidence. I 
marked his exhibits as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-E. Absent an objection, I admitted all 
five exhibits into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 
24, 2018. (Tr. at 19-36.) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and works for a defense contractor. He married in 2004, 
and he separated from his wife in January 2016. He and his wife have no children, though 
his wife has an adult son from a prior relationship. Applicant has no financial responsibility 
to his wife following their separation in January 2016. (GE 2 at 20; Tr. at 39-41, 44.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1985, and in May 2007, he received his 
bachelor’s degree. He has worked full time for a defense contractor since January 2007. 
From 2003 to 2017, Applicant had a second, part-time job with a different defense 
contractor. In or about May 2009, he began working for his current employer and security 
clearance sponsor. He received his first security clearance in June 2004. His clearance 
was renewed in 2010 or 2011. He submitted a security clearance application on January 
20, 2016, (SCA) seeking the renewal of his top secret clearance. (GE 1; GE 2 at 20, 24; 
Tr. 39, 44, and 48.) 
 
The SOR contains nine allegations under Guideline F, eight of which involve 
Applicant’s failure to pay federal and state taxes in 2014 and 2015 and state taxes in 
2013, as well as his failure to file federal tax returns in 2013, 2014, and 2015. Applicant’s 
total federal and state tax debts are alleged to be about $32,000 for these years. He is 
also alleged to owe $1,339 on a judgment obtained by the homeowners’ association 
(HOA) where he lived with his wife from 2002 to 2016. In his SOR answer, Applicant 
admitted all of the allegations except the HOA judgment. He also claimed that he owes 
significantly less in taxes than was alleged in the SOR and that he has filed amended 
returns to support that position.  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application, dated January 20, 
2016 (GE 1), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 In August 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) and other related charges. He failed to report the arrest to his part-time 
employer at the time, as required by the employer’s rules. This was a major rules violation, 
and his employer terminated him on January 20, 2017. Under Guideline E, the SOR 
alleges Applicant’s 2016 DUI arrest and his subsequent termination from his part-time 
employment. Applicant admitted both allegations in his SOR answer. (GE 4 at 2; GE 2 at 
23.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e: failure to pay federal income taxes in 2014 
and 2015 in the approximate amount of $27,913 and failure to file federal income 
tax returns, as required, in 2013, 2014, and 2015. In his January 2016 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he failed to file his 2014 federal tax return because he owed taxes for that 
year. He wrote that he was saving money every month so he could satisfy this obligation 
in 2015. His SCA, however, was signed on January 20, 2016. He testified that he had 
originally prepared the SCA in 2015, and due to a technical problem, he had to resubmit 
the SCA in 2016. (Tr. at 27.) 
 
 In response to the DOD CAF’S April 2017 interrogatories, Applicant provided his 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax account transcripts for the years 2013, 2014, and 
2015, which were dated June 5, 2017. The 2013 transcript shows that Applicant failed to 
file a tax return for that year. The 2014 transcript shows that the return was filed late on 
April 24, 2017, and that Applicant owed about $15,500. The 2015 transcript shows that 
the return was filed late on May 29, 2017, and that Applicant owed approximately $20,490. 
(GE 2 at 8-10.)  
 
 In his January 2017 background interview, Applicant explained that prior to 2014, 
he and his wife filed jointly, but in 2015, she advised him that she wanted to file separately. 
He said that because of this change, he failed to file his 2014 and 2015 tax returns. 
Applicant advised the investigator that he believed he owed taxes. He said that he had 
not yet done anything about his taxes, but he intended to work with a friend, who is a tax 
accountant, to file his returns. He also said he intended to make payment arrangements 
with the IRS. (GE 2 at 24.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that later in 2017, he consulted his tax 
accountant friend and the accountant filed amended returns for those two years and filed 
the missing 2013 return. He explained that prior to 2013, he and his wife had previously 
worked together with a large tax preparation company to prepare and file their tax returns. 
Starting in 2013, his mother and sister became seriously ill and he was busy taking care 
of them. He also blamed his tax delinquencies on his marital problems with his wife. He 
failed to work with his tax preparer that year. He did not contact a tax accountant until 
2017. During the three years in question, which was before his January 2016 separation 
from his wife, he also stopped taking any deductions on his family home. Instead he let 
his wife take these deductions on her separate returns. Applicant claimed that his failure 
to file for three years was not due to the fact that he knew he owed money and was not 
in a position to pay the taxes at the time.(Tr. at 67-73; 78, 83, 90, and 106.) 
 
 
4 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant introduced into evidence updated IRS tax account 
transcripts, dated August 15, 2018. These transcripts show that Applicant filed his 2013 
tax return on September 11, 2017, and owed $8,572. The reason he owed more taxes 
was due to his change in his tax filing status and his failure to adjust his withholding after 
receiving an increase in his income. He testified that he has never changed his 
withholding. The updated 2014 transcript reflects that Applicant filed an amended return 
on November 7, 2017, and that he had no balance due as a result of credits for his refunds 
from 2016 and 2017 and certain other adjustments. Similarly, the updated 2015 transcript 
reflects that Applicant filed an amended return on November 20, 2017, and that after 
certain adjustments and a small credit from his 2017 refund, Applicant only owed $5,008. 
(Tr. at 73-84; AE A, B, and C.) Accordingly, Applicant’s total tax debt for 2013 and 2015 
is approximately $13,580, as of August 15, 2018, based upon Applicant’s amended 
returns. 
 
 Applicant admitted at the hearing that the IRS had not fully accepted the numbers 
in the amended returns, and therefore, the Service has not given him a final number 
representing his total tax liability for the 2013-2015 period. As a result, he has not 
commenced paying his federal tax debt on a payment plan. He blamed the 2017 amended 
returns for the delay. Applicant has not received any financial counseling in connection 
with his tax indebtedness or more generally since 2013. (Tr. at 86, 95-96, and 109.) His 
federal tax debt is not resolved, though he ultimately filed his tax returns for 2013-2015 in 
2017. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h: failure to pay state income taxes in 2013, 2014, and 
2015 in the total amount of $4,088. As noted, Applicant disclosed in his SCA his failure 
to file his state tax return for 2014. The Government’s evidence includes state tax 
computation notices, dated May, June, and July 2017, for the years 2014, 2015, and 
2013, respectively. Applicant testified that these dates in 2017 are the dates he filed his 
state tax returns. Applicant provided these documents in response to the Government’s 
interrogatories. They reflect Applicant owes state taxes for 2013 in the amount of $1,889. 
For 2014, the record evidence shows that he owes $861, and for 2015, he owes $1,900. 
As of mid-2017, Applicant’s total state tax debt was approximately $4,650. (Tr. at 84-94.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant introduced into evidence a state installment tax bill, dated 
July 30, 2018, which reflected that his remaining balance was about $220 and that he 
owed an installment of about $94 on August 15, 2018. He testified that he commenced 
paying on his installment payment plan in approximately January 2018 and presently 
owes about $126. (AE D; Tr. at 93.) Applicant has resolved his state tax debt with 
consistent monthly payments, though he filed his 2013-2015 state tax returns in 2017, 
long after their due date. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: December 2016 judgment in favor of HOA in the amount of $1,339. 
At the hearing, Applicant also introduced into evidence a court order quashing the HOA’s 
garnishment of his bank account and ordering the Garnishee bank to return all garnished 
funds to Applicant. He testified that he was able to have the judgment and the 
garnishment of his bank account vacated because he was never notified about the 
 
5 
 
proceeding. Also, the home that was the subject of the HOA dues was solely the 
responsibility of his wife and he had no obligation to pay these fees. The HOA judgment 
was obtained against Applicant about 11 months after he left the home, and it was solely 
occupied by his wife and her son at that time. (Tr. at 98-100; GE 3.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a: August 2016 DUI arrest and guilty plea to a lesser offense. 
Applicant admitted that he used poor judgment the night of his DUI arrest. He had 
consumed two beers at a bar where he was listening to music and then he drove home 
when he was arrested. The police officer who stopped him said that he had swerved into 
another lane. At the security clearance hearing, Applicant testified that he passed the field 
sobriety test following the traffic stop by the police, though in his background interview, 
he admitted that he failed the test. He was then given a breathalyzer test and his BAC 
was over the legal limit at 0.9 grams. He pleaded guilty to a reduced charge and received 
probation before judgment in December 2016. He was given a one-year period of 
probation, which he successfully completed. This arrest occurred after his January 2016 
separation from his wife. He believes that the sinus medication he was taking that night 
enhanced the effect of the alcohol he consumed. This was Applicant’s second DUI arrest. 
The first occurred in 1995 when he was 27. That arrest is not alleged in the SOR. He no 
longer drinks and drives, and he spends his limited free time engaged in more 
constructive activities. (Tr. at 52-54, 56-58, and 103.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b: January 2017 employment termination for failing to report DUI 
arrest in compliance with employer’s security rules. With the consent of the parties, 
I amended the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b to correct a scrivener’s error in the incorrect 
reference to the allegation in SOR ¶2.a. Department Counsel also moved to amend this 
allegation to conform to the evidence that the employer’s self-reporting policy required 
reporting within 12 hours of an arrest, not 12 days. With Applicant’s consent, I granted 
the Government’s motion to amend this allegation, as noted. Applicant then entered his 
admission to the modified allegation. (Tr. at 12-14.) 
 
 Applicant testified that after the DUI court action was completed, he brought the 
court papers to his supervisor at his part-time employer and filled out a form disclosing 
the arrest. The supervisor forwarded these documents to the “front office.” He claimed 
that he verbally reported the arrest and probation before judgment to his supervisor in or 
about December 2016. He was told that he failed to report the arrest in a timely manner 
and was suspended pending an investigation. He was subsequently terminated for 
violating the employer’s policy after having worked there for ten years. Applicant testified 
that he was unaware of the policy. He said that he notified the security officer at his full-
time employer shortly after his arrest and subsequently provided the court paperwork 
when his case was completed. Presently, Applicant only works at his full-time job. (GE 5 
and 6; Tr. at 46, 58-67, 108.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
 
6 
 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
 
7 
 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, testimony and the documentary evidence in the record 
establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), 
and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
 
8 
 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indication that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant presented no evidence to support a 
conclusion that his financial irresponsibility with respect to his federal and state tax 
obligations are unlikely to recur or that this history of irresponsibility does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability and judgment. Applicant’s federal tax indebtedness has continued 
unresolved for years, and he still has no installment plan to begin paying his delinquent 
federal taxes. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s various family issues, though serious 
and largely beyond his control, should not have caused Applicant to fail to discharge his 
most basic civic duty of filing his taxes on time. As evidenced by his recent filing of 
amended returns, he had someone with tax expertise available to help him, and he failed 
to seek that help in a timely manner. Moreover, Applicant could not pay his taxes when 
they were due, and his family problems were not the reason for this problem. He was 
working two jobs, and he failed to withhold sufficient funds from his paycheck to cover his 
tax liabilities for three years. Also, his inability to pay his taxes when they were due does 
not explain his failure to enter into payment plans to pay his taxes over time. In his January 
2016 SCA, he wrote that he was saving money in 2015 to pay his 2014 federal tax liability, 
but that payment was not made. Although he has now paid his relatively small state tax 
debt, he has failed to enter into a payment plan with the IRS. Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant has not received financial counseling. 
He has resolved his state tax debt for 2013-2015 and the HOA judgment. His federal tax 
debt, however, remains unresolved. The IRS has not even accepted his attempt to reduce 
his taxes by filing amended tax returns for the years 2013-2015. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially established. Applicant has paid his state tax debt and has 
filed his state and federal tax returns, though they were filed long after the mandatory 
filing dates. He has not, however, initiated a payment plan to pay his significant federal 
tax debt. 
 
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is fully established with respect to the HOA judgment alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.i. Applicant has documented that a civil court has entered an order validating 
Applicant’s dispute of this debt. 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) is partially established. Applicant has filed his federal and state tax 
returns, though he did so long after the required filing deadlines. His untimely filings only 
partially mitigates this security issue. To his credit, Applicant entered into an installment 
payment plan to pay his relatively small state tax debt, and he has documented that he 
paid off those taxes. The most significant issue raised in his SOR is his substantial federal 
tax indebtedness. He has not made arrangements with the IRS to pay this debt. The fact 
that the IRS has not accepted his amended returns is troubling. Applicant may end up 
being obligated to pay even more than the total amount owed according to his amended 
returns, i.e., over $13,000. Due to his late filing of the amended returns and the IRS’s 
possible disagreement with those returns, Applicant has not yet entered into a payment 
plan with the IRS, let alone establish a track record of consistently making payments 
under such a plan. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
The following disqualifying condition under this guideline is potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
 
10 
 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of . . . rule 
violations. 
 
 Applicant second DUI arrest in August 2016 and his failure to follow his long-term 
employer’s “major rules” with respect to self-reporting security issues establishes the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The only potentially applicable mitigating condition under Guideline E is the 
following: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. His part-time employer considered his violation of 
its self-reporting requirement to be sufficiently serious to warrant his suspension, an 
investigation, and ultimately, his termination. The violation was not minor. Insufficient time 
has passed to conclude that similar rule violations are unlikely to recur. The violation casts 
serious doubt on his reliability and judgment. Even if Applicant was unaware of his 
employer’s self-reporting rules, it reflects poorly on his judgment that he did not try to 
determine when he must report the arrest to his employer’s security officer. He held a top 
secret clearance from the Defense Department and that carries with it a significant duty 
to act responsibly, especially in the area of self-reporting personal circumstances that 
raise possible security concerns. 
 
 The above is particularly concerning in light of Applicant’s August 2016 DUI arrest. 
Standing alone, this criminal offense raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness to 
comply with important criminal laws. When combined with the bad judgment he exercised 
during the same time period by not reporting his arrest in a timely manner, Applicant 
evidences a pattern of rule violations. As noted below, this evidence supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
 
11 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). In particular, I have weighed 
Applicant’s age and maturity, the serious nature of his financial misconduct, and his failure 
to obey an important rule on self-reporting potential security issues and the criminal law 
prohibiting driving under the influence of alcohol. His misconduct started in 2013 when he 
failed to file his federal and state income tax returns and has continued up through the 
present with his failure to pay of his federal taxes. This history of misconduct and pattern 
of rule violations increases the likelihood of the recurrence of poor judgment and 
additional misconduct.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
