1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 18-01760 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 2, 2015. On 
June 29, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines
(December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.
Applicant answered the SOR on July 26, 2018, and requested a decision on the 
written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on August 22, 2018. On August 23, 2018, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
02/14/2019
 
2 
 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on September 5, 2018, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on January 17, 2019.  
 
The FORM included Item 9, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on September 12, 2017. The PSI summary was not authenticated as required 
by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions 
or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI summary on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI summary by failing to 
respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, 
they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the 
Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old senior network engineer employed by a federal 
contractor since October 2014. He received a bachelor’s degree in July 2010, and he 
previously worked for federal contractors from November 2012 to March 2013. He 
married in June 2007 and has three children, ages 10, 7, and 6. He received a security 
clearance in November 2010.  
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are reflected in a credit report from 
November 2015. (Item 8.) The evidence concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: mortgage loan in foreclosure with a balance of $317,952. Applicant 
purchased a home in March 2007 for $328,000 and had an interest-only mortgage loan, 
on which the payments were $2,000 per month. When his wife stopped working as a day-
care provider, they began having financial difficulties. He tried unsuccessfully to refinance 
his mortgage loan. His mortgage lender went bankrupt and the loan was assumed by 
another lender. At the suggestion of a friend, Applicant enrolled in a debt-relief program 
that advised him to challenge the lender’s authority to collect payments. He filed 
documents in October and November 2011, demanding that the successor lender provide 
proof of authority to collect the payments. There is no evidence that the lender responded. 
Applicant stopped making payments and deposited $2,000 in an escrow account each 
month.  
 
In order to avoid foreclosure, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 
June 2012. The petition included the company servicing the mortgage loan and the credit-
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
card accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g, and it indicated that the debts were disputed. 
(Item 5.) The bankruptcy petition was dismissed in August 2012 when Applicant failed to 
attend the creditors’ meeting. He filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in October 
2012. After the bankruptcy court declined to approve Applicant’s payment plan, he 
changed his mind about pursuing bankruptcy and requested that his petition be dismissed 
without prejudice. The petition was dismissed in February 2013. This petition listed the 
mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the credit-card accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
and 1.g, and it indicated that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e was disputed. (Item 7.) 
The two bankruptcies are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i.  
 
Applicant sought permission from the loan servicer for a short sale, which was 
denied. (FORM Item 9.) The property was foreclosed, and it was sold in March 2016 to 
another realtor. Applicant applied for and received relocation assistance from the buyer 
and agreed to move out by April 30, 2016, in return for $3,000. (Item 10, Exhibit B-1.) The 
record does not reflect the sale price for the home. A credit report from November 2015 
reflected that the property was in foreclosure, with a balance due of $317,952. There is 
no evidence in the record reflecting a deficiency after the foreclosure sale. Based on the 
limited evidence in the record, the debt appears to be resolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.g: Credit-card accounts charged off for $5,172; $3,322; and 
$8,173; credit-card accounts placed for collection of $14,340; $12,707; and $6,072. 
Applicant fell behind on credit-card payments at the same time as his mortgage loan, and 
he used the same debt-relief provider to dispute these six debts. His provider used a 
common practice of disputing every debt listed in a credit report, in the hope that some 
debts would fall off the credit reports. Applicant did not challenge the validity of any 
specific debts or assert specific errors underlying his delinquent debts. Instead, he made 
general assertions asserting faulty accounting and lack of documentation. The accounts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g were disputed in November 2011. The accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were disputed in March 2012. The account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was 
disputed in July 2012. The credit report from November 2015 reflects that the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are disputed. There is no evidence that any of the 
disputes have been resolved. After filing his disputes, Applicant admitted the debts during 
the PSI in September 2017 and in his answer to the SOR in July 2018. In his response to 
interrogatories in May 2018, he asserted that collection of the debts is barred by the 
statute of limitation. (Item 10.)  
 
Applicant’s first bankruptcy petition did not reflect completion of the required credit 
counseling, but his second petition reflected that it was completed in October 2012. In the 
PSI, he stated that he is meeting current obligations, but he provided no specific 
information about his income and expenses.  
 
  Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
4 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
 
5 
 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the delinquent mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
The downturn in the real-estate market that made refinancing of Applicant’s mortgage 
loan difficult was a circumstance beyond his control. If is not clear whether his wife’s 
decision to stop working was involuntary and a condition beyond their control. He acted 
responsibly regarding his mortgage loan by trying to refinance it and exploring the 
possibility of a short sale. This mitigating condition is not established for the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.g. Instead of trying to resolve these debts, Applicant resorted to delaying 
tactics until collection was barred by the statute of limitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant completed the required counseling for his 
second bankruptcy, but his financial problems are not resolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant made no voluntary payments on the 
mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a after it became delinquent. He presented no evidence 
of payments, payment plans, or other resolution of the delinquent debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b-1.g. He abandoned the two Chapter 13 bankruptcies before any payment plans 
were confirmed by the court. Even if judicial enforcement of Applicant’s delinquent debts 
is precluded by the statute of limitations, reliance on such a remedy is not a substitute for 
good-faith efforts to pay off the debts. ISCR Case No. 07-16427 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010). 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant disputed his delinquent debts as a 
delaying tactic, but he admitted during the September 2017 PSI and his answer to the 
SOR that they were valid debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. Applicant has worked for federal contractors and held a security 
clearance for many years. He was caught in the downturn in real-estate values and 
hampered by limited income. However, he resorted to delay and avoidance rather than 
reasonable efforts to resolve his delinquent credit-card debts. Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
