1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01738 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 Statement of the Case 
On April 12, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On June 29, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information; 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines issued by the Director of National 
Intelligence, effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.1 
1 GE 1, 3. 
02/15/2019
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2018. He admitted three of the SOR 
allegations, (¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.g), and he denied the others, (¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f). 
He submitted documents with his response to the SOR. Applicant requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2  
 
 On August 24, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six items, 
was mailed to Applicant on August 27, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 45 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant received the FORM on 
September 4, 2018, and he provided a written explanation and additional documents in 
his response to the FORM. I labeled his documents as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D, 
which were admitted into evidence. Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 6, which 
I marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6, and admitted into evidence. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on December 13, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 34 years old. He has been 
employed full time with a Federal contractor since January 2018. His wife is not 
currently employed, and his family is living on his income. He had previously been 
employed by the same Federal contractor in another state from January 2015 to 
approximately January 2018. Applicant was unemployed from June 2009 to February 
2010. He earned an Associate's degree in 2010, and he received certification as an 
electrician in 2015. He married in 2007 and has one daughter, age five. He earned two 
honorable discharges with the U.S. Air Force in 2009, and in 2016 from the U.S. Air 
Force Reserve.3  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent accounts totaling approximately $87,887, 
which are supported by credit reports submitted by the Government.4 Applicant did not 
disclose any adverse financial information on his SCA. He has five unpaid consumer 
debts, a medical account referred for collection, and delinquent Federal taxes owed for 
tax year 2016. In his response to the SOR, Applicant said that he was disputing the 
delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e, pursuant to the Fair Debt 
Collection Practices Act and the Fair Credit Reporting Act. Applicant believed the 
creditor could not provide a valid contract, promissory note, proof or validation of the 
alleged debt, and therefore, he could not be held responsible for the debt. Applicant 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 GE 5, 6, 7, 8. 
 
3 
 
 
also claimed that one of the alleged debts is fraudulent. (SOR ¶ 1.f.) The record 
establishes the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges an account referred for collection in the approximate amount 
of $60,639. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt and provided letters 
from the collection agency related to the debt. These letters addressed Applicant's 
dispute and noted that his file was now closed and a request was submitted to the credit 
reporting agencies to have his account removed. This debt is resolved.  [Not needed 
since you find the documentation sufficient to resolve the debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a consumer charge account referred for collection in the amount of 
$6,847. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this account, but he did not 
believe the amount was correct. He did not provide any documentation to support this 
claim. He admitted that he had not made any payments on this account. In response to 
the FORM, Applicant admitted that he had just initiated contact with the creditor to see if 
a settlement agreement could be reached. He provided no corroborating 
documentation. This debt has not been resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a jewelry account charged off in the amount of $4,916. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this account, but he said this account became 
delinquent during his unemployment in August 2011. The credit report showed that the 
account became delinquent in November 2015.6 In addition, the SCA also showed that 
Applicant was unemployed from June 2009 to February 2010. As of August 2011, he 
was employed part time in the U.S. Air Force Reserve.7 In response to the FORM, 
Applicant admitted that he had just initiated contact with the creditor to see if a 
settlement agreement could be reached. He provided no corroborating documentation.  
This debt has not been resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a consumer credit account referred for collection in the 
amount of $1,786. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt and said that 
he was disputing the debt pursuant to the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act and the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act. He did not provide any explanation for the dispute or provide 
supporting documentation. In response to the FORM, Applicant stated that the credit 
bureaus have informed him that the account was verified and he was obligated to pay it. 
Applicant is in contact with a law firm to see if a settlement agreement can be reached. 
He provided no corroborating documentation. This debt has not been resolved.9 
 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 GE 5. 
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a consumer credit account referred for collection in the 
amount of $1,289. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt and said that 
he was disputing it. He did not provide any explanation for the dispute or provide 
supporting documentation. In response to the FORM, Applicant stated that the credit 
bureaus have informed him that the account was verified and he was obligated to pay it. 
Applicant is in contact with a law firm to see if a settlement agreement can be reached. 
There is no supporting evidence of any effort by Applicant to repay, settle, or resolve 
this account. This debt has not been resolved.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a medical account referred for collection in the amount of 
$810. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this account and listed that the 
account was fraudulent. In response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he has taken 
measures to have the medical account removed from his credit report after he 
discovered the medical account was opened in another state (State 2) Applicant lives in 
State 1. He denied living in State 2, therefore, he believed it was a fraudulent account.  
  
 However, Applicant's spouse received military orders to report to State 2 while 
Applicant remained in State 1, as he said in his SOR response. In his SCA, Applicant, 
disclosed dates of residence in State 2. He provided a copy of his dispute with the credit 
bureaus and a copy of a fraud alert that he had filed. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation regarding communications he may have made with the medical provider 
to verify the account. His assertion that it is fraudulent, without verifying documentation, 
is not enough to show that this account is in fact fraudulent, especially considering his 
connections with the state where the account was opened. This account has not been 
resolved.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a Federal tax debt for tax year 2016 in the amount of $11,600. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this tax debt and said that he had 
enrolled in an installment agreement. He had been making monthly payments to the 
IRS. He did not provide supporting documentation of when he entered into the 
installment agreement, provide a history of monthly payments made in accordance with 
the installment agreement, or disclose the current amount of the tax debt.  
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant said that he had "recently" elected to 
participate in the installment agreement and provided documentation from the IRS. The 
letter from the IRS showed that on August 21, 2018, Applicant had inquired about 
resolution of his delinquent Federal taxes for both tax year 2016, and tax year 2017, 
which was not alleged. The IRS stated that a revised installment agreement required 
Applicant to make $200 monthly payments beginning on September 28, 2018. Applicant 
did not provide any documentation of any payments he has made to the IRS, or the 
current amount of his federal tax debt.  
 
                                                          
10 Id. 
 
11 AE A, C, D. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant mentioned in his response to the FORM that the reason for him owing 
taxes for 2016 was due to him filing under the "Married Filing Separate" criteria. He has 
never had to pay taxes in the past, so he believed he must have made an error on the 
tax return. Applicant did not provide any explanation why he also owed taxes for 2017, 
as noted in his attached documentation.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has approximately $87,887 of delinquent debt, to include Federal 
taxes, that is unpaid and unresolved, as shown on his credit reports. In ISCR Case No. 
08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
   
 There is insufficient evidence to apply any of the mitigating conditions. Applicant 
disputed four of the seven delinquent accounts, (SOR (¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f.), but he 
did not provide a valid explanation for his disputes, and he did not provide any 
supporting documentation to show that his disputes with the original creditors were 
valid. He did not provide proof of his communication with the original creditor to 
determine whether a medical service account was in fact fraudulent. Applicant admitted 
responsibility for the other three debts, but he failed to provide any evidence to show 
that he is paying, resolving, or has settled any of those debts, to include any payments 
he has made for delinquent 2016 taxes. There is no evidence to show Applicant 
received financial counseling or that he acted responsibly under the circumstances in 
dealing with his creditors.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant is credited with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. He consistently 
denied knowledge of this debt, and the only evidence that he owed it is a credit report. 
He disputed the debt, and it is removed from his credit report.  
   
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust with the Government. An applicant is 
not required to be debt-free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial 
obligations. 
 
 Aside from the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant failed to provide supporting 
documentation to mitigate his delinquent accounts, and he failed to demonstrate that he 
acted reasonably under the circumstances in dealing with his creditors. There is no 
showing by Applicant of any effort to pay, legitimately dispute, or otherwise resolve the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g. Applicant has not provided a financial plan or a 
detailed budget of his current financial circumstances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s good 
judgment, reliability as well as eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Because 
protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
 
9 
 
 
unresolved doubts must be resolved against the granting of eligibility to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
