1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01649 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate financial considerations, but did mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 8, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on September 21, 2018. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 14, 2018, and had 30 days to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
02/25/2019
 
2 
 
Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 through 7, were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about China or the Peoples Republic of China (PRC). (Item 8) The 
request and the attached source documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning the PRC.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts 
are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts gleaned from HE 1. 
 
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China's 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail. 
 
 In assessing the military and security developments in China, the DOD has 
reported that: Chinese actors are the world's most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with 
continuing technological advances in the global information environment. Chinese 
leaders are focused on developing the capabilities they deem necessary to deter or 
 
3 
 
defeat adversary power projection and counter third-party including U.S. intervention 
during a crisis or conflict. China's military modernization is producing capabilities that 
have the potential to reduce core U.S. military technological advantages. 
 
Further, the DOD found that China very likely uses its intelligence services and 
employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key 
national security and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other 
materials unobtainable through other means. China is using its cyber capabilities to 
support intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. China uses state-
sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the level of technologies and 
expertise available to support military research, development, and acquisition. 
 
The organizational network of China's military-industrial complex is such that the 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use technologies or 
knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development. China has 
in place a long-term, comprehensive military-modernization program designed to 
improve its armed forces' capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity-regional 
conflicts and, as China's global footprint and international interests grow, its military 
modernization program has become progressively more focused on investments for a 
range of missions beyond China's periphery. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese 
government has conducted large-scale cyber-espionage against the United States. 
China has compromised a range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense 
contractors, and private enterprises. China's material incentives for continuing this 
activity are immense and unlikely to be altered by small scale U.S. actions. China's 
progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to China's substantial and 
sustained investment in defense research and development (R&D). China's large-scale, 
state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary information also has 
allowed China to fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China, the U.S. Department 
of State reported: The People's Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in 
which the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. Repression and 
coercion have markedly increased recently, particularly against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and public interest and ethnic 
minority issues, and against law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
Human rights concerns that were observed included: extralegal measures to 
prevent public expression of critical opinions; repression of free speech, religion, 
association, assembly and movement for certain minorities; extrajudicial killings; 
enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention, including prolonged detentions 
in "black jails"; torture and coerced confessions of prisoners; detention and harassment 
 
4 
 
of individuals who sought to peacefully exercise their rights under the law; a lack of due 
process; searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communications; 
opening of domestic and international mail; as well as severe restrictions on citizens' 
freedom of association and free speech.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He was born in the United States (U.S.) and obtained a 
graduate equivalency diploma in 1995. He completed some college courses but did not 
obtain a degree. Applicant married in 2003 and divorced in 2012. He has two children 
from that marriage, ages 13, and 14. He married again to a Chinese national on April 9, 
2016. She moved in with Applicant and brought her own two children to join his two 
biological children. Applicant’s wife is a resident alien in the U.S. She has a green card 
and is presently in the process of applying for citizenship. She signed official documents 
renouncing her Chinese citizenship and she is a stay-at-home mother to the four 
children. Applicant has never traveled to China, and he has no intent to do so. He owns 
no property, bank accounts, or other assets in China. Applicant has been employed as 
a senior-systems-engineer for a federal contractor since March 2016. He reports a 
previous security clearance from 2010.  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions or security 
clearance application (SCA) on April 13, 2016.2 In his personal subject interview (PSI) 
with a clearance investigator on May 15, 2017, he disclosed that his wife’s parents, her 
brother, and her sister, are citizens and residents of PRC. It is unclear whether her 
siblings in the PRC have any affiliation with the PRC government or intelligence 
services. Applicant’s father-in-law is 77 years old and suffering from late stage 
Alzheimer’s disease. He is retired as an office clerk from a home loan agency in PRC. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law has always been a housewife-mother. It is unclear whether 
either in law has any affiliation with the Chinese government, or whether Applicant and 
his wife will inherit property located in China when they pass away. Applicant’s wife has 
contact by telephone with her mother, in China, once a week. She owns no property or 
bank accounts in PRC.  
 
 Applicant disclosed in section 26 of his SCA that he had back surgery in July 
2005 and he lost significant income as he was out of work for a period of time. Applicant 
was unemployed from January 2002 to April 2003, and he had other shorter periods of 
unemployment after that. He avers that his unemployment combined with his 2012 
divorce and uncovered medical expenses for himself, his current wife, and his children, 
caused his financial problems.  
 
 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that the federal-tax-lien in the amount 
of $2,482 at SOR ¶ 1.a would be paid by December 2018. No explanation of how this 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated April 13, 2016, (Item 3) and the summary of his clearance interview by a 
clearance investigator on May 15, 2017. (Item 4) 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
tax lien arose, or documentation showing that it was paid, was provided. The federal tax 
lien imposed in 2014 in the amount of $194,839 arose from tax years (TYs) 2007 and 
2008 when Applicant inherited valuable stocks, which he sold to buy a home. 
Inexplicably, Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns timely for those TYs 
and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) assumed that the money from the converted 
stocks was ordinary income.3 Thus, he owed additional income taxes. He attached IRS 
Forms 1040 (income tax returns) for TYs 2007 and 2008, to his answer. Both were 
signed and submitted on August 24, 2018. His problems were exacerbated when he 
received duplicate W-2 forms from his employer in 2012. Applicant claims (without 
substantiation) that he contacted the IRS and hired a tax attorney to help sort this out. It 
is unclear, what was done by the attorney, but the tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.b still stands.   
 
 In 2014 – 2015, Applicant was out of work for several months each year, and he 
struggled to keep up with the $525 per month payments on his family vehicle. It was 
voluntarily repossessed, sold at auction, and a $10,866 deficiency resulted, as reflected 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. While Applicant claims to be making payments pursuant to a plan on this 
debt, in the amount of $100 per paycheck for two years, no evidence of actual 
payments was provided. Similarly, he claims that the medical debt for $85 in SOR ¶ 1.o 
has been paid in full, but provided no evidence of payment.   
 
 In SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant has disputed the debt in the amount of $1,756 since 
2013. He claims to have made payment in full and returned the two devices to a 
telecommunications provider. However, he provided no correspondence with the 
creditor documenting the dispute. The remainder of the delinquencies alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.e through 1.o are for medical debts that were not covered by health insurance. In 
his answer, Applicant stated he made a commitment to pay the remaining medical debts 
by December 2018. He provided no documentary evidence that he has done so. He 
contends that his ex-wife was ordered by the court to pay for half of the children’s 
medical expenses. Applicant has been working with her to pay some of the medical 
debts and he attached a few receipts evidencing payment of some random moving 
expenses, consumer loans, pay-day loans, and medical bills to his answer. It is unclear 
which SOR debts these documents pertain to, if any.   
  
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
3 Answer to SOR. 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
7 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
           (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
           tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as  
           required.  
 
 Applicant’s federal-tax-liens and delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are 
confirmed by his credit reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), 
and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.4 Applicant has not met that burden. The tax liens and  
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR have not been adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant endured back surgery, a divorce, and periods of unemployment several 
years ago. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. Yet, despite his 
knowledge three years ago that his tax liens and delinquencies might affect his eligibility 
for a security clearance when he completed his SCA, and then reinforcing his intention 
to make payment arrangements two years ago in his PSI, he has done nothing 
demonstrable to resolve these federal-tax-liens and delinquent accounts. He has 
produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with his Answer to the SOR, 
or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that 
his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
 
9 
 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC. 
PRC is continuously engaged in cyber-espionage against the United States, economic 
espionage, and human rights abuses. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.5  
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
10 
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant was born in the United States and he is a U.S. citizen. He is married to 
a former Chinese national, who renounced her Chinese citizenship, and applied for U.S. 
citizenship. She dutifully telephones her mother in China a few times a week. There is 
no indication that Applicant speaks Chinese, or speaks to his mother-in-law at all during 
these phone calls. His father-in-law has terminal stage dementia and doesn’t speak. 
Applicant never traveled to PRC, nor does he plan to. He holds no accounts or property 
there. He has longstanding relationships and loyalties here in the U.S. Although his wife 
has parents in the PRC, which is an authoritarian regime, her contact with them is de-
minimis. Applicant’s contact is virtually non-existent. There is no indication that his in- 
laws are affiliated with the Chinese government or intelligence services. Applicant is 
committed to his life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are applicable to the PRC family 
members contacts, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a. Because Applicant’s ties to the 
PRC are minimal and inconsequential, I find that all foreign influence concerns have 
been mitigated.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence but not the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:                       FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                                   For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
