1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-00187 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 21, 2016. 
On March 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines E and F.1 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 9, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2018. The Defense 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
02/15/2019
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on July 31, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened on August 28, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing, but did not 
introduce any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old industrial engineer for a defense contractor, employed 
since 2004.  Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 1983 and a master’s degree in 
1985. He married in 1978 and divorced in 1987, and married in 2002 and divorced in 
2015. He has one adult child. He has held a DOD security clearance for 32 years. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant met a woman online that he 
has not met in person, and borrowed and sent approximately $65,670 to her in Nigeria. 
As a result, Applicant became delinquent on financial obligations and filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition in 2016. The bankruptcy is pending a final discharge. These 
allegations are cross-alleged under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
admitted the SOR allegations, and provided explanations in his Answer. 
 
Applicant divorced from his second spouse in October 2015, incurred responsibility 
for nearly all of the marital debt, and gave up about half of his bank assets and retirement 
fund. His household income was reduced once his spouse left. At the same time, 
Applicant believed he was providing financial assistance to a woman, “K,” whom he met 
through an online dating site. K was supposedly an American citizen traveling to Nigeria 
for business. Applicant never met K, but spoke with her in two short phone calls, and often 
texted with her from 2015 to 2018. During this period, K provided many requests for 
Applicant to send her cash, including problems with getting medically cleared to leave the 
country, visa issues, etc. Applicant wanted to help her, so he began sending money via 
Western Union. In the summer of 2016, Western Union suspected fraud, and prohibited 
him from sending money to Nigeria with their service. Applicant then used Money Gram 
until they refused to continue to send money, also suspecting fraud. Applicant resorted to 
buying $100 gift cards and sending them to K on his own. Next, K directed Applicant to 
deposit money into U.S. bank accounts in other people’s names. At first, Applicant sent 
$10,000, but was required to complete a federal financial transaction form for the bank. 
To avoid completing the form, he sent no more than $6,000 at a time. Applicant borrowed 
about $69,000 in loans to send to K in Nigeria, and sent another $100,000 over time. 
 
Applicant became delinquent on his mortgage loan and other debts, causing him 
to declare bankruptcy and file a Chapter 13 case in 2016. The Chapter 13 requires a five 
year payment plan, to be completed in 2021. Applicant declared about $115,000 in debt.  
 
K was aware of Applicant’s financial distress and bankruptcy, but continued to 
press him for money. He stopped sending cash at the end of 2016 on the warning of his 
bankruptcy attorney, but continued the relationship to the summer of 2018, even after 
receiving the SOR. Applicant told K where he worked and his job title. However, Applicant 
 
3 
 
never notified his employer’s facility security officer (FSO), law enforcement, or the dating 
website of the fraud scheme, even by the time of the hearing, but he testified that he is 
considering it. 
 
Applicant has not sought psychological counseling, but is considering using the 
services provided by his employer. He was required to utilize financial counseling before 
filing bankruptcy. Applicant described his actions with regard to K and his finances as 
“lack of good judgment.” He stated he was emotionally involved, was in denial, and 
wanted to believe her. He ended the relationship after it became “painfully obvious” to 
him that it was fraudulent. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
4 
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
 
5 
 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information . . .  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes:  
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The personal conduct alleged is generally sufficient to implicate 
AG ¶¶ 16 (d), (e), and (g). 
 
Guideline E includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and 
found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
Applicant participated in the scheme to transfer money to a possible foreign 
national was initially unwittingly, however, once money transfer companies began to 
question the transactions, he should have known that the scheme was likely fraudulent. 
His inability to realize the fraudulent nature of the relationship early on, exposes a long 
series of errors in judgment, and calls into question Applicant’s willingness and ability to 
safeguard protected information. Although he has now acknowledged the relationship 
 
6 
 
was likely fraudulent, he continued to have contact with K long after he was notified of the 
likely fraudulent nature of the relationship. He disclosed his employment and job title, and 
has been reluctant to report the relationship to his employer’s FSO, the dating website, 
or law enforcement. He has not sought counseling to assist him in preventing similar 
conduct in the future. Based on his significant loss of good judgment and secretive nature 
of his relationship, Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence of mitigation. I am not 
convinced that this incident is behind him or that similar high-risk and irresponsible 
behavior will not recur. No mitigation fully applies. 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 18 (a), (b), and (c). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s involvement in a thinly-veiled relationship to fraudulently extract money 
from him was at first unwitting; however, it quickly became apparent to be a fraudulent 
scheme with a possible foreign national. His continued involvement with borrowing money 
and transferring about $169,000 to a “person” he never met invokes a significant degree 
of poor self-control, lack of judgment, and an intent to hide his relationship from 
appropriate authorities. His lack of financial control is troubling, and raises significant 
doubts about his overall financial management decisions and personal financial 
responsibility. I am not convinced Applicant is financially responsible or makes good 
financial decisions. No mitigation fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guidelines E and F, in my whole-person analysis. I also considered 
Applicant’s long history of employment and security eligibility. However, his involvement 
in the fraudulent relationship, borrowing money to send to an unknown foreign person, 
bankrupting himself to continue the scheme, and continued participation even after being 
warned about the scheme and after receiving the SOR in this case, shows a complete 
lack of awareness and judgment expected of a person entrusted with classified 
information. I remain unconvinced of his financial responsibility, good judgment, and 
ability to resist further high-risk activity. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s security clearance is denied. 
 
 
   _______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
