 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01502 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jessica Coronado, Esq., Grady & Associates 
 
 
February 7, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On June 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct.  
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 10, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on August 29, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 
2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 4, 2018. The 
Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 7, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered five exhibits at the 
hearing, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, which were admitted without 
objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 42 years old.  He is married with two children from his current 
marriage, and one from a prior marriage.  He has a high school diploma, military 
training, and some college.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Project 
Manager.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.   Applicant has been working for his current employer since September 
2016. 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges in the SOR that the Applicant engaged in conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleges in the SOR that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance 
because he made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The Government alleges in the SOR that Applicant is ineligible for clearance for 
engaging in criminal conduct that creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness, and calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations.   
 
 Applicant admits, with an explanation, each of the allegations set forth under 
each of the guidelines noted above.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated January 7, 
2012; December 13, 2016; and August 27, 2018, confirm each of the debts listed in the 
SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.)  Applicant served in the United States Navy 
for thirteen years from February 1998 until March 2008.   
 
While serving in the Navy, on or about August 9, 2007, Applicant pled guilty to 
Larceny, under Article 121 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for stealing 
Overseas Base Housing Allowance in the approximate amount of $31,938.70; and 
Forgery, under Article 132 of the UCMJ, for fraud against the United States for providing 
forged documents in the furtherance of the crime of larceny.  From October 2005 to 
 
3 
 
February 2007 Applicant received Overseas Housing Allowance (OHA) for his 
dependants living in the Philippines.  Applicant submitted a lease agreement to his 
command that showed that his family rented a house for about $1,400 US dollars a 
month in the Philippines, and per DoD regulations, Applicant is entitled to the amount of 
rent plus utilities in OHA.  Subsequently, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service 
checked Applicant’s designated residence on the lease and found that Applicant’s 
family were not living there.  Applicant was provided his rights and confessed to creating 
a fake lease to receive OHA, by falsely representing that his family was living in the 
Philippines.  He submitted the forged document to the Government as a real document.  
By providing this fake lease to the Government, Applicant was able to obtain 
approximately $32,000 in money that he was not authorized to receive.  (Tr. p. 28.)  
Applicant was found guilty at a Special Court-Martial.  Applicant spent 30 days in the 
brig, 60 days restriction afterwards, reduction in rate to E-3, and forfeiture of pay of 
$1,100 for six months.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant was administratively 
discharged from his military service due to his actions. In March 2008, as a result of his 
misconduct, Applicant received an Other than Honorable Discharge.  (Tr. p. 31.) 
 
After being discharged from the military, Applicant did not attempt to pay off his 
debt.  Almost eleven years have past since this incident occurred and Applicant did not 
even attempt to pay the debt back to the Government.  The debt was eventually 
charged off in the approximate amount of $46,094.  Applicant testified that at some 
point he noticed that his Federal income tax refunds were being garnished, but he did 
not pay much attention.  (Tr. pp. 37 - 38.)  In December 2018 or early January 2019, 
Applicant made his first voluntary payment toward resolving the debt of $100.  (Tr. p. 
35.)   
 
 Two letters of recommendation submitted on Applicant’s behalf from his Program 
Manager and from his Team Manager indicate that they consider the Applicant to be a 
hard worker, who is intelligent, punctual, and who consistently goes above and beyond 
to complete the tasks assigned to him.  His is also described as a diligent and reliable 
team member and a role model for others.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and B.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
 
4 
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and   
  
 (e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by for foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group.   
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing;  
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in 
that country; and 
 
 (f) violation of a written recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 Applicant deliberately committed a fraud against the Government, and stole 
thousands of dollars from the Government that he has still not paid back.  He forged a 
lease agreement to receive benefits that he was not authorized to receive.  What makes 
the situation even worse, is the fact that he was serving in the United States military at 
the time he committed the offenses.  He was trusted to serve and protect the interests 
of United States, and he failed.  Although this misconduct occurred nearly eleven years 
ago, it is so eggregious and goes to the core of why the DoD is concerned about the 
protection of national security.  Applicant was not honest with the Government eleven 
years ago, and has still not shown that he is reliable and trustworthy.  Under the 
circumstances, there is no excuse for Applicant’s significant breach of trust.  There are 
no applicable conditions that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
 
6 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 (d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional  financial breaches of trust. 
  
 Although Applicant did incur the debt over ten years ago, he only recently started 
to make payments to resolve it.  The debt has increased since he incurred it.  He now 
owes approximately $46,094.  This does not show a good faith effort to resolve his debt.  
He remains excessively indebted.  At this time, there is insufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  It is noted that Applicant’s misconduct in the past occurred almost eleven years 
ago.  However, as eggregious as it was, over the years, Applicant totally ignored the 
debt, and did absolutely nothing until recently to try to resolve it.  Recently, meaning 
only after he applied for a security clearance, and realized it could be an obstacle for 
him in obtaining a security clearance.  This debt owed to the Government for fraudulent 
criminal conduct should have been paid back as soon as possible.  Applicant still owes 
the debt and little has been done over the years to resolve it.  At this point, it cannot be 
said that he is financially stable, that he has shown good judgment, or that he has made 
a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness.    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 
7 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15. 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.   
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information.  This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
 (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; and  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has failed to provide 
sufficient evidence in mitigation.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Personal Conduct, Financial Considerations, and Criminal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT   
   
Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT   
   
Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
