1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-00452 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On March 2, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 9, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2018.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 7, 2018, scheduling the hearing for January 11, 2019. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
though E. The record was left open until January 25, 2019, and Applicant timely submitted 
02/22/2019
 
2 
 
a packet of documents, which was marked as AE F, and was accepted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 23, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 44, is single. She obtained her associate’s degree in 2000, and has 
been studying for her undergraduate degree for a few years. She is not attending classes 
at this time.  She is a senior administrative assistant for a defense contractor. Applicant 
completed her security clearance application (SCA) on March 28, 2016. (GE 1) She has 
held a security clearance for about 12 years. (GE 1) She has worked for her current 
employer since June 2018. She previously worked as a contractor since about 2005. (Tr. 
18) 
 
The SOR alleges in 1.a through 1.n, 14 delinquent debts totaling about $34,000, 
which include four student loan accounts, charged-off consumer accounts, and medical 
accounts. (GE 2-4) Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and provided explanations for 
each one. (Answer) 
 
FINANCIAL 
 
Applicant acknowledged her financial hardship, and explained that she believed 
her finances were under control when she submitted her SCA, but explained that six knee 
surgeries, other medical issues in 2016 through 2018, including a back surgery, 2016 
sexual assaults in the workplace, and lost days of paid employment for months resulted 
in her current delinquent debt. (Tr. 8) Applicant missed many days of employment due to 
the workplace issue and did not have a full paycheck for about one and a half years. 
Applicant was unemployed when she left the workplace after the late 2016-2017 sexual 
assaults and took a reduction in pay in her next job. (Tr. 22) She has spoken to a 
bankruptcy attorney, but she does want to pay her debts. (Tr. 9) She is in the process of 
consolidating student loans. 
 
Applicant recounted how the sexual assaults at work led to depression and 
because she was afraid to report the incidents to her employer, she would take sick days 
maybe one or two days a week. (Tr. 21-24) She spoke to an attorney and had a case 
worker and found the experience traumatic. Her emotional instability prevented her from 
concentrating on her finances. This was the time period of 2016-2017 before she looked 
for other employment. She knows that she has to take full responsibility for the financial 
situation.  
 
Applicant has paid the following SOR accounts: 1.j, an account in the amount of 
$581; 1.e, an account in the amount of $1,126; 1.f, a medical account in the amount of 
$245; 1.g, a medical account in the amount of $103; 1.h, a collection account in the 
amount of $89; 1.i, a medical account in the amount of $181; and 1.n, a phone account 
in the amount of $202. (AE D-F) 
 
Applicant has the following SOR accounts in a payment plan: 1.a, a charged-off 
account in the amount of $11,215 that has a term of 45 monthly payments of $250. (AE 
 
3 
 
A) SOR 1.c, a charged-off account in the amount of $5,536 that has a term of 44 monthly 
payments of $125. (AE B) Applicant has made one or two payments on each account, 
but did not provide documentation.  
 
As to the student loans at issue, SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.k, and 1.l, Applicant believes they 
total about $25,000. (Tr. 32) She started making payments on the loans but stopped in 
2016. (Tr.32)  Her student loans are not in deferment as she is not taking any classes. 
Applicant’s intention was to return to class, but that did not occur.  She has been in contact 
with the Department of Education and is in the process of arranging a payment plan that 
she can afford. At the present time, she cannot afford the offered $700 a month. A 
collection agency now is handling the loans and Applicant has been in touch with them 
and hoping for a $300 a month payment. This has not been approved. (Tr. 35)  
 
Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a state university for a registered class 
that she did not take and did not timely withdraw. (SOR 1.m) The amount owed is $1,797. 
She explained that she has not attempted to resolve this account. She explained that 
there were times when she was depressed that she did not open her mail. (Tr. 42) 
 
Applicant is working with her father to develop a budget and a strategy to handle 
her finances. She earns about $70,000 a year and lives with her two brothers. She has 
no new delinquent debt and no car loan.  Applicant has also spoken to the collection 
agent for the student loans concerning financial counseling. She has a monthly net 
remainder of about $365 after expenses. She has health insurance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
4 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are the result of many surgeries, medical problems, 
unemployment, and workplace sexual assaults in a particular period of time. She attended 
classes and obtained school loans but has not been financially able to begin a 
consolidation payment plan. These events were beyond her control and do not cast doubt 
on her trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established.    
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established.  Applicant’s unemployment, health issues, and 
medical problems, and other issues were beyond her control, and she has acted 
responsibly recently toward the majority of her smaller delinquent debts, with the 
exception of the student loans and state university account. She has only recently 
established two payment plans and made only one or two payments. She has not 
produced sufficient information to show that she has been proactive in her actions. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not fully established. Applicant did not produce evidence 
of any financial counseling nor are there clear indications that her financial situation is 
under control. She has not been able to consolidate her student loans and owes money 
to a state university. She has recently started payment plans but has only made one or 
two payments on each. She has made strides, but her financial problems are not under 
control.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including her credibility and openness at the hearing. Applicant had 
circumstances that occurred beyond her control and she has made strides in rectifying 
her financial situation. However, at this time, Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
