1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01606 
) 
In the matter of: 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Concerns). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On June 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended (Exec. Or.); DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG) for all adjudicative 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
Applicant provided a response to the SOR on July 13, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. In her response, she admitted 
all five allegations of the SOR and provided four documents.  
02/01/2019
 
2 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 15, 
2018, which included five documents. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit a written response and documents to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 2, 2018. She had until 
November 16, 2018, to respond to the FORM and provide documentation in mitigation of 
the Government’s security concerns. She failed to provide a response. The four exhibits 
Applicant attached to her SOR answer and the Government’s five exhibits are admitted 
into the record. The Government’s exhibits are referred to herein using Department 
Counsel’s numbering for each Item. The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted the five allegations under Guideline F and 
set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She earned a high school diploma in 2003 and an 
Associate’s degree in 2004. She entered into a civil union in 2004 and has two children, 
ages 11 and 13. She has worked for a government contractor as a reviewer since 2017. 
(Item 3 at 2.) She has been continuously employed in a full-time job since 2008. 
 
 On October 24, 2017, she submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In the 
SCA, she disclosed that she was delinquent on several debts, including the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. With respect to her college student loans (SOR ¶ 1.a), 
(apparently borrowed in 2003 and 2004), she has never been able to afford payments on 
the loans, which now total about $26,000. According to her statement in her SCA, these 
loans were in forbearance until March 2012, and she has been unable to pay them “due 
to poor job decisions and having children.” The loans have been assigned to the 
Government and are presently in collection. In her January 2018 background interview, 
she stated that she intended to contact the Government and begin paying this debt after 
she received her 2017 tax refund. (Item 3 at 3.) She provided an introductory rehabilitation 
letter from the U.S. Department of Education, dated February 26, 2018, with her July 2018 
SOR answer. She failed to provide anything further and did not respond to the FORM in 
which Department Counsel made clear that she needed to provide documentation of 
payments on her debts to mitigate the Government’s security concerns. (Item 3 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant admitted in her SOR answer that her two Capital One credit card 
accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c) have been charged off. The Government’s evidence 
shows that the last payments on these accounts were made in May 2017. Applicant wrote 
in her October 2017 SCA that these accounts were four months delinquent because her 
husband changed jobs and implied that he made less income. She wrote further that she 
planned to begin paying these accounts again in November 2017. In her January 2018 
background interview, she explained that her husband had changed jobs to a 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application, dated October 24, 
2017 (FORM Item 2), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
commission-based compensation and that this caused them financial hardship. (Item 3 
at 4.) She further advised the investigator that he changed jobs again to a full-time job, 
which would give them sufficient income to start paying these debts. She attached to her 
SOR answer two documents reflecting her agreement with the collection agency handling 
these accounts, Client Services Incorporated, to pay both accounts off within a year or 
so. (Item 1.) She has offered no additional evidence, however, to reflect that she followed 
through on these two payment plans or has made any payment to the creditor. 
 
 The two other delinquent debts in the SOR (¶¶ 1.d and 1.e) are credit card debts. 
Applicant provided a proposed payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but has 
provided no evidence of any follow-up actions or payments. Also, she provided no 
evidence reflecting any efforts to contact the creditor handling the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
4 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in her testimony and the documentary evidence in the 
record establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG 
¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). 
 
 
5 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant blames her financial problems on her poor job choices, which 
presumably refers to working at jobs with low wages. She also blames her problems on 
the expense of raising two children and her husband’s decision to work at a job with an 
unreliable commission income. Starting in 2018, he has been working at a full-time job 
and apparently with a more reliable income. She advised the investigator conducting her 
background interview that she anticipated receiving a tax refund in March 2018 and would 
begin repaying her debts. She provided no evidence that she made any payments on any 
of her debts, even though Department Counsel in his FORM explicitly wrote that she has 
not provided evidence of any payments of her debts and such evidence was important to 
her case. She also provided no evidence that she has received any financial counseling. 
 
 I conclude that none of the above mitigating conditions apply and that Applicant 
has not made a serious attempt to provide evidence to support a conclusion that she has 
acted responsibly in the handling of her delinquent debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
6 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
her past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
