1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01764 
) 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
June 8, 2017 (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2018, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 15, 2018. The evidence 
02/28/2019
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-5 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on October 
29, 2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or submit any 
additional evidence. Items 2-5 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to 
me on February 14, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted some of the allegations, with some explanation, and denied 
other allegations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review 
of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since February 
2017. Between 2014 and 2017, he was engaged in non-government employment. From 
2006 to 2014 he was employed by other federal contractors. He has an associate’s 
degree and a bachelor’s degree. He has never married. He has two children.1  
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant owed 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$123,000. These debts include past due, charged off, and collection accounts 
comprised of student loans, consumer debt, state tax liens, and child support 
obligations. Credit reports from May 2017 and March 2018 support the delinquent 
debts.2 
 
 Applicant explained that his debt problems were caused by not having enough 
money to pay all his obligations. Except for two of the student loan debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.d), Applicant failed to provide documentation to support that he was addressing 
his debts through payment, dispute, or contact with the creditors. The status of his debts 
is as follows:3  
 
Student Loan Debt. The SOR lists five delinquent student loans. Two accounts are to 
creditor A totaling $57,764 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d). Three accounts are to creditor B 
totaling $21,970. Applicant’s SOR answer included an attachment showing his account 
with creditor A. This account reflected that a loan consolidation occurred in May 2018, 
but it failed to detail what loans were consolidated. It further documented that Applicant 
paid $58,069 in April 2018 and $143 in May 2018 toward his balance owed. Through 
October 2018, it showed Applicant had not made any additional payments and that his 
current balance was $73,943. There was no information in the document concerning the 
student loan debt to creditor B. These debts are partially resolved.4   
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 4-5. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
4 Items 1 (See attachment to Applicant’s answer); 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Tax Liens. The SOR listed two state tax liens (¶¶ 1.k and 1.l) in the total amount of 
$3,611. During his background interview with an investigator, Applicant claimed these 
liens were placed because he failed to file his state tax returns for 2013 and 2015, and 
pay the resulting tax owed. He stated that his wages were garnished and this tax debt 
was paid in January 2018. These two liens did not appear on his March 2018 credit 
report. They are resolved.5 
 
Child Support. The SOR listed a delinquent child-support debt in the amount of $7,075 
(¶ 1.o). Applicant disputed that he was behind on his child support obligations. He 
maintained that he consistently has paid his $200 weekly required amount. In his 
answer, Applicant admitted this debt and stated, “Arrears are paid bi-weekly.” His March 
2018 credit report does not list this debt. This debt is being resolved.6  
 
 As stated above, Applicant failed to provide any documentation showing what 
action he has taken to resolve the remaining debts. While his March 2018 credit report 
shows that he disputed some debts, it does not provide the rationale for those disputes 
or their resolution. He did not provide any information about his current financial 
situation or a budget, other than to state that he can meet all his current obligations. 
There is no documented evidence of financial counseling.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 5. 
 
6 Item 1, 3, 5. 
 
7 Item 1, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has delinquent student loans and consumer debts that remain unpaid 
or unresolved. He also failed to timely file his 2013 and 2015 state income tax returns 
as required, resulting in the filing of two tax liens. I find all the disqualifying conditions 
are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant did not state any circumstances why his financial problems were 
beyond his control, other than that he did not have enough money. AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. Aside from paying two student-loan accounts, apparently being current on his 
child-support debt, and resolving his tax liens through garnishment, Applicant failed to 
 
6 
 
 
provide documentation showing efforts to pay or settle any of the remaining debts. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not fully apply. 
The involuntary garnishment appears to have satisfied his state tax debt. 20(g) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his civilian employment 
and his payment toward two student loans, but I also considered his lack of progress in 
resolving his remaining debts. Applicant has not established a track record of financial 
stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance because of his financial 
status. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.k – 1.l, 1.o:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c, 1.e – 1.j,   
       1.m – 1.n, 1.p. – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
