1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02055 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On September 7, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on November 26, 2018. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 28, 2018, and had 30 days to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded on January 14, 2019, by 
02/19/2019
 
2 
 
providing a two-page typed statement. This response was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AE) A and it was admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
documents, identified as Items 1 through 3, were also admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2019.  
 
                                      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. The request and the attached source documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I. All of the documents referenced in the Request for Administrative Notice and the facts 
asserted therein, are from open sources and are dated. Afghanistan has been plagued 
by corruption and human rights abuses; it is often lawless; and it has been described as 
a failed-nation-state. The United States has been at war there for over 17 years. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and are incorporated by reference in this decision. 
 
Department Counsel also astutely withdrew SOR ¶¶1.b through 1.g in the 
Government’s FORM. The remaining allegations include only SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h, 
which both concern Applicant’s mother.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old interpreter-translator sponsored for a security 
clearance by a defense contractor. He was employed by a federal contractor previously 
as an interpreter for U.S. armed forces, from May 2011 to September 2012, at forward 
operating bases in Afghanistan. He is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Afghanistan and he is fluent in the languages spoken by Afghans. This is precisely why 
the United States (U.S.) contractor sought Applicant out and hired him – for his esoteric 
language skills. He was born in Afghanistan and graduated from high school in Kabul in 
1998. Applicant came to the U.S. in 2006 and he was naturalized in 2016. He has been 
employed as an interpreter for U.S. interests in Afghanistan since September 2017 and 
he plans to live and work in Afghanistan pending the grant of his security clearance.    
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions also known 
as a security clearance application (SCA) on September 21, 2017.2 Applicant disclosed 
that he was married in 2006 and divorced in 2010. He was employed previously as an 
Uber driver, Lyft driver, or as a security guard, at various times since he entered the 
U.S. (Item 3) Applicant was unemployed from November to December 2014; from 
October 2012 to August 2013; and November 2009 to March 2010. Although he served 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions dated September 21, 2017 (Item 3). 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
as a linguist for U.S. armed forces in 2011- 2012, Applicant responded negatively to 
questions in section 25 (Investigations and Clearance Record) of his SCA asking 
whether the U.S. or any foreign government previously granted him a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant was married in 2006 and divorced in 2010. He has no children. 
Applicant’s mother and most of his siblings are citizens of Afghanistan. His mother and 
one brother reside in Afghanistan. Applicant has contact with his mother by telephone 
once every other day. She is 56 years old, lives with Applicant’s brother, and she is not 
employed outside her home. She has never been affiliated with the Afghanistan 
government, or any other foreign government. His mother knows about Applicant’s 
translator services, but does not tell others that he is working in support of U.S. 
concerns, out of fear for his safety. Applicant sends his mother $500 to $700 dollars 
each month to help with her rent and groceries. He sent her $15,000 between 2009 and 
2017. Applicant has no sympathy, preference for, or alliance with foreign nationals 
except his mother.  
  
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. Afghanistan is 
continuously at war and continues to have human rights problems, rampant corruption, 
and terrorist attacks. It remains a safe haven for terrorism, and has been unstable for at 
least 17 years. Applicant’s foreign contact with his mother may create a potential conflict 
of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
Although, he sends his mother financial aid monthly, Applicant has no expectation of 
ever receiving that money back. Thus, he has no financial or property interests in 
Afghanistan.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.3  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
6 
 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under Guideline B, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h, 
in his answer to the SOR of October 2018. These contacts with his mother, and 
furnishing of financial aid to her, together with country conditions that create a 
heightened risk of coercion or exploitation, raise security concerns.     
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 2006. He became a U.S. citizen in 2016.  
Applicant has gone in harm’s way repeatedly in Afghanistan, and supported the U.S. 
military in a war zone for 18 months.4 He has longstanding relationships and loyalties 
here in the U.S. Although he has provided financial support to a foreign citizen in the 
past, it was reasonable under the circumstances. He is gainfully employed by a federal 
contractor and appears to be a solid citizen. He continues to have regular contact with 
his mother in Afghanistan, which is to be expected of a dutiful son. There is no 
indication that she is affiliated with the Afghanistan government or intelligence services. 
His mother knows about his interpreter services and is not vulnerable to foreign 
coercion or exploitation. Applicant is committed to his new life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) 
are applicable to the Afghanistan family-member-foreign contacts, which are alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h. Because Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan are minimal and 
inconsequential, I find that all foreign influence concerns have been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                                          
4 The Appeal Board has held that “an Applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States 
is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an Applicant in a Guideline B case.” ISCR Case 
04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. March 20, 2007). 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.h  For Applicant 
   
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
