1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01186 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct 
and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On May 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 30, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2018. The 
02/11/2019
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on the 
same day. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 18, 2019. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A and B. There were no objections to any exhibits, and they all were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on January 31, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He served in the military from 2002 to 2006 and was 
honorably discharged in the paygrade E-5. He has never married and has no children. 
He is working on completing his bachelor’s degree.1 
 
 In February 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault causing 
bodily injury. A person insulted his girlfriend and Applicant hit him. Applicant described 
himself as “young and dumb.”2 He pled guilty to the misdemeanor and paid a fine. In 
October 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana. He 
pled guilty and served 30 days in jail. Applicant admitted that in May 2002, he was 
charged with failure to stop and give information. He could not recall the incident, but 
remembered he paid a fine of $200.3  
 
 Applicant testified that he was serving in the military in August 2006 and his 
friends were giving him a farewell party before he was discharged. Applicant was 
intoxicated. There was a designated driver, but this person decided to take the vehicle 
he was driving onto private beach property. Applicant stated he woke up and was being 
pulled out of the vehicle. He spent the night in jail, and the owner of the property 
decided not to press charges, so they were dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant testified that the night of December 31, 2008, he was home and his 
cousin called him from a bar. Applicant went to the bar and consumed some alcohol. He 
was driving his cousin home and was stopped by the police. He testified that his 
breathalyzer result was .09%. He was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated. After he completed the requirements of a pretrial diversion program, which 
included a defensive driving course, a 5-day alcohol awareness course, and 100 hours 
of community service, the charge was dismissed.5  
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-18. 
 
2 Tr. 20; GE 4. 
 
3 Tr. 20-23; GE 4. 
 
4 Tr. 24-26; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. 26-27, 34-35; GE 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2017, Applicant was attending a coworker’s birthday party. He had taken a 
ride-share vehicle to the party. He consumed too much alcohol, became intoxicated, 
and blacked out. He testified he had no recollection of the night. He and his girlfriend 
had separate rooms, but had permitted each access to the other’s. Applicant went into 
his girlfriend’s hotel room to return a gift and then went back to his room. She returned 
later and was also intoxicated. She could not find an item in her room and began 
banging on Applicant’s hotel room door, which he did not answer because he was 
passed out. The hotel staff called the police. The police attempted to wake Applicant 
and gain access to his room. He did not answer due to his intoxication. Once he woke, 
he was arrested and charged with 2nd degree burglary, theft and criminal damage per 
domestic violence. Applicant attended court two days later and the charges were 
dismissed. Applicant’s former girlfriend provided a letter corroborating the events and 
explained the hotel staff misunderstood the situation, and there was no crime 
committed. She regretted how the event transpired and escalated. Applicant reported 
the November 2017 incident to his employer immediately after he was released from 
jail.6   
 
 Applicant testified that he consumes alcohol about one to three times a month. 
The last time he was intoxicated was in November 2017 when the incident happened at 
the hotel. He has not had an alcohol evaluation. He stated that he has only been to a 
bar once since the 2017 incident and that was for his friend’s birthday, and Applicant 
was the designated driver. Otherwise, he no longer goes to bars and when he drinks it 
is at home. He does not believe he has a problem with alcohol. He has made a decision 
that he will not consume alcohol in public places, such as bars and restaurants. He has 
learned his lesson. He stated he has a huge opportunity to further his career with his 
employer and does not want to jeopardize it. He promised that in the future, he will not 
drink alcohol to intoxication.7  
 
 Applicant is remorseful and embarrassed, and regrets his past mistakes. He 
accepts responsibility for his past conduct and is committed to acting responsibly in the 
future.  
 
 Applicant provided character letters from coworkers and friends who describe 
him as a dedicated professional who is always at the work site on time; is focused on 
attention to details, and consistently adheres to security requirements. He is considered 
reliable, diligent, honest, generous, intelligent, ethical, friendly, considerate, 
hardworking, and trustworthy.8  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29-30, 35-36; GE 3; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 30-33; 37-44. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested for criminal offenses six times from 2000 to 2017, and 
has three convictions. The offenses included assault, possession of marijuana, public 
intoxication and trespassing, driving while intoxicated, burglary, theft and criminal 
damage. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant was involved in a series of minor criminal offenses from 2000 to 2006. 
Those offenses alone would not justify denial of a security clearance. However, 
Applicant was arrested and charged in 2009 for driving while intoxicated. He 
 
6 
 
 
successfully completed a pretrial diversion program. It appears he was not involved in 
any new criminal conduct until 2017, when he was arrested after an incident at a hotel. 
This charge was dismissed and there is sufficient evidence to conclude it was a 
misunderstanding. The last three incidents involved alcohol, which is a concern. 
Applicant immediately reported the 2017 incident to his employer, which shows he 
recognized the potential security implications. He understands the negative impact his 
criminal offenses and alcohol have had on his life and career. He credibility testified that 
he is committed to ensuring alcohol does not have an impact on his life in the future. It 
appears from character letters from friends and coworkers that Applicant is dedicated to 
his job. He has not been intoxicated since the event of November 2017 and has only 
been to a bar once for a birthday party, and he was the designated driver. Applicant 
expressed sincere remorse for his conduct and I believe he has a new appreciation for 
the devastating impact a future criminal or alcohol-related incident will have on his life 
and career. I find that future criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. Based on Applicant’s 
good employment record as expressed through his coworkers and his commitment to 
the responsible consumption of alcohol, there is sufficient evidence to conclude that 
there is successful rehabilitation. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal offenses six times from 2000 to 
2017 and has three convictions. The offenses included assault, possession of 
marijuana, public intoxication and trespassing, driving while intoxicated, and burglary, 
theft and criminal damage. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to the 
disqualifying security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
The same conduct that was alleged under the criminal conduct guideline was 
cross-alleged under the personal conduct guideline. The same rationale and analysis 
detailed above under the criminal conduct mitigating conditions apply under the 
personal conduct mitigating conditions. The above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 37 years old. As a young man he made some minor mistakes that 
resulted in criminal arrests. He was charged with driving while intoxicated in 2009 and 
 
8 
 
 
successfully completed a pretrial diversion program. Although there was an incident in 
2017, it was dismissed and appeared to be a misunderstanding. I considered 
Applicant’s demeanor, candor, and remorsefulness. Applicant understands and 
acknowledges that alcohol has had a negative impact on his life. He is committed to it 
not having an impact on his future. He understands he has a career opportunity and any 
future negative conduct could deny him that chance. I believe he will comply with his 
promises. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant has mitigated the 
criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
