1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-00852 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B based upon 
Applicant’s family ties to the Republic of China (Taiwan). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
History of the Case 
On May 7, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended (Exec. Or.); Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 18, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge of the Defense Office at the Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on October 4, 2018. On October 17, 2018, DOHA issued a 
02/19/2019
 
 2 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing on November 13, 2018. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits into evidence, which I 
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. He also offered two requests for 
Administrative Notice, one regarding Taiwan and the other regarding the People’s 
Republic of China (China). I marked these as GE 3 and 4. Applicant testified and offered 
one exhibit. I marked his exhibit as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A. Government Exhibits 1 
and 2 and AE A were admitted into the record without objection, although Applicant 
provided some corrections to GE 2.  
 
I kept the record open until December 14, 2018, to give Applicant the opportunity 
to provide additional documentation in support of his case. On December 13, 2018, he 
emailed me a document. I have marked Applicant’s email and document as AE B and 
admitted the exhibit into the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on November 29, 2018. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Taiwan and China. His written requests (GE 3 and 4) and supporting documents 
were not admitted into the record as evidence, but are attached to the record solely for 
administrative notice purposes. The facts administratively noticed are set forth below in 
my findings of fact.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the three SOR allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was born in Taipei, Taiwan, in 1973 and is 45 years old. He was raised 
in Taiwan and graduated from high school in 1991 and college in 1995. He received his 
bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering. After graduating, he relocated to the 
United States to pursue his post-graduate education in engineering. He received two 
master’s degrees, one in 1997 and the second in 1999. In 2002, he began a doctorate 
program in the United States. He completed his Ph. D. in 2006. All of his U.S. degrees 
were awarded by prestigious U.S. universities.  
 
After receiving his second master’s degree in 1999, Applicant moved back to 
Taiwan and worked there for about three years. He returned to the United States to enter 
a doctorate program. After receiving his Ph. D., he remained in the United States and has 
worked at five U.S. companies. His two most recent positions have been with major U.S. 
defense contractors. In December 2016, he was sponsored for a security clearance by 
                                                          
 
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GE 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3 
the first defense contractor. Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) was 
submitted shortly after he began working for this employer. He changed companies three 
months later, and his new employer is continuing to sponsor him for a clearance. (GE 2 
at 2; Tr. 14-15.) 
 
 While living in Taiwan in 2002, Applicant married a Taiwanese woman. They 
moved to the United States later that year when Applicant began his doctoral studies. 
They have since had three children, ages, 15, 13, and 9. They were all born in the United 
States and are U.S. citizens. At one point, they possessed Taiwanese passports. 
Applicant is unsure whether they are presently dual citizens of the United States and 
Taiwan. (GE 2 at 4; Tr. at 40-41.) 
 
Applicant’s first U.S. employer applied for Applicant to become a permanent 
resident in the United States. In 2011, the government granted him and his wife alien 
registration status. They became naturalized U.S. citizens in July 2016, a few months 
before Applicant submitted his SCA. On October 26, 2018, shortly before the hearing in 
this case, Applicant submitted a request to the Taiwanese government to renounce his 
Taiwanese citizenship. His request was granted on November 27, 2018, after the DOHA 
hearing. His wife retains her dual citizenship with Taiwan. Applicant renounced his 
Taiwanese citizenship based upon the advice of his employers, which have sponsored 
him for a security clearance. (AE A and B; Tr. 14, 32.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, and sister are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His 
mother is a homemaker. When Applicant was young, she was a full-time, and later a part-
time, high school teacher. She ceased working as a teacher when Applicant was in 
school. His father is retired. He worked as a teacher at a vocational school. In his SCA, 
Applicant wrote that neither of his parents had or presently has any affiliation with the 
Taiwanese government or its affiliated industries. In his SCA, he reported that he speaks 
with his parents weekly. He testified that more recently, he speaks with them “constantly,” 
which he then explained is every other week. (Tr. 25, 44.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his father paid for his two U.S. master’s degrees. His father 
was born in 1941 and was 56 years old when Applicant earned his first master’s degree 
in 1997 and was 58 when he earned his second master’s. Applicant’s father retired in 
1996 at the age of 55. (Tr. 54.) 
 
When asked if either the Taiwanese government or the Chinese government paid 
for any of his education, Applicant equivocally responded “No, I don’t think so.” When the 
question was repeated, he answered “No” and then changed the subject to the low cost 
of education in Taiwan and other matters. Applicant’s responses and his demeanor at 
that point in the hearing suggested that he may not have been completely candid in 
answering questions about who paid his tuition and living expenses for four years of 
graduate education while he was studying for his two master’s degrees in the United 
States. Applicant also testified that he paid the expenses for his doctorate studies with 
his own savings from when he worked in Taiwan for three years (1999-2002) and by 
working as a research assistant at his U.S. university. (Tr. 41, 54, 55.) 
 
 4 
 
Applicant’s sister is a professor at a public university in Taiwan. She also received 
a Ph. D. from a U.S. university. In his SCA, he wrote that he communicates with his sister 
monthly. He testified, however, that he actually has much less communication with her 
and has not spoken with her since his most recent trip to Taiwan in July 2018, about four 
months earlier. He said he only communicates with her when he visits Taiwan. He 
provided no explanation for the discrepancy between his 2016 SCA disclosure and his 
testimony on this point. (Tr. 25-26, 44.) 
 
 The parents and the siblings of Applicant’s wife are also citizens and residents of 
Taiwan. His wife has a close and continuing relationship with her Taiwanese family. Her 
mother worked as a sales person for a clothing company, and her father worked as a 
security guard at an apartment building. Both are now retired. Her sister is employed in 
the financial industry in Taiwan. Her brother is a salesman, who sells anti-theft, car-
locking devices.  
 
Applicant’s wife has regular contact with her family in Taiwan. In his SCA, Applicant 
wrote that he speaks with his mother and father-in-law monthly by phone. At the hearing, 
he testified that he merely says hello to his wife’s parents once a month when he happens 
to be in the same room as his wife when she is talking on the phone with her parents. In 
his background interview, he said that he has monthly telephone contact with his sister-
in-law and brother-in-law when he is with his wife and she is talking with them on the 
phone. At the hearing, he described his contacts with his sister-in-law and brother-in-law 
in the same manner. (GE 1 at 30-32; GE 2 at 4; Tr. at 26, 44, and 51-53.) 
 
 In response to Section 19 (“Foreign Contacts”) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed 
that he has three friends from his undergraduate days with whom he has “close and/or 
continuing contact.” He noted that he maintains annual contact with each of them. He 
testified that in addition to their contacts as undergraduates in Taiwan, he also lived with 
them in Taiwan for about six months in 2002 before he moved to the United States for his 
doctorate program. He testified without any explanation that he “was required to provide 
three names in Taiwan” and that it “was hard for me to generate those three names.” The 
three “foreign contacts” he identified are not the three persons he was asked to identify 
in response to Section 16 (“People Who Know You Well”) of his SCA. He provided 
information for four persons with U.S. addresses in response to that question. (Tr. at 15, 
26, 27, and 44-45.) 
 
 The three foreign contacts Applicant identified work for an aircraft engine 
maintenance company, an electronic equipment inspection company, and a company that 
manufactures power supply lines for computers. Applicant had to contact them to obtain 
their employment information in his SCA because he did not know what they did or the 
names of their employers. Furthermore, he testified that he does not “visit my friend[s] 
that much” and “basically I don’t have a friend in Taiwan.” He did admit though that he 
and his wife saw one of his listed foreign contacts in the hospital during his most recent 
trip to Taiwan in the summer of 2018, but claimed that this person “forced me to meet 
with him.” (Tr. 15-16, 26, and 45-49.) 
 
 5 
Throughout his testimony discussing his three foreign relationships, Applicant 
attempted to minimize the extent of his contacts with them, making the point that he did 
not have their phone numbers and only communicated with them through social media. 
He testified that his contacts with them were “actually” limited to the 1997 or 1998 time 
period, when he and one friend communicated about their courses in mathematics. He 
failed to reconcile this statement with his testimony that he actually lived with these three 
persons in 2002. He also testified that “even though I know they work in the technology 
industry but I don’t exactly know what they do in Taiwan, their job descriptions in detail 
because basically we don’t talk about it.” In his background interview, however, he told 
the interviewer that with respect to one of the friends, they work in the same industry and 
frequently discuss industry topics when they have contact. Applicant’s inconsistent 
statements, demeanor, and the credibility of his testimony about his relationships with his 
friends suggested that he was attempting to portray falsely his relationships with one or 
more of his reported foreign contacts. (GE 2 at 4; Tr. at 26, 27, and 44-45.) 
 
 Prior to obtaining his U.S. citizenship in July 2016 and receiving his U.S. passport 
a month later, Applicant travelled on his Taiwanese passport. After he was awarded his 
Ph. D. in 2006, Applicant has returned to Taiwan six times. Applicant visited Taiwan each 
summer in 2016, 2017, and 2018. (GE 2 at 2; Tr. at 65.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have lived in a home they own since 2010, for two years in 
one state and then six years in another. Applicant provided no documentary evidence or 
testimony of his other financial ties to the United States. He has renounced his Taiwanese 
citizenship and considers himself to be an American. He believes he has lived in the 
United States for a long time, and he followed all of the proper procedures to obtain his 
U.S. citizenship. He testified that he has no contact with anyone in Taiwan who works in 
his industry. (Tr. 29, 57-58, and 67.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts regarding Taiwan and 
China. Taiwan is a multi-party democracy, established as a separate, independent 
government by refugees from mainland China in 1949. The United States recognized 
Taiwan as an independent government until January 1979, when it formally recognized 
the Chinese government as the sole legal government of all of China, including Taiwan. 
This has been referred to as the U.S. “One-China” policy. Nevertheless, the United States 
and Taiwan enjoy a positive, unofficial relationship.  
 
Chinese actors are the world’s most active perpetrators of economic espionage. 
China aggressively targets sensitive and protected U.S. technologies and military 
information, using worldwide intelligence operations, including Chinese intelligence 
operatives based in Taiwan. The United States faces a serious threat to its national 
security from Chinese intelligence collection operations. China uses it intelligence 
services and employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to 
obtain important export-restricted technologies and equipment. China’s collection 
activities include the use of Chinese nationals, such as students and researchers to act 
as procurement agents or intermediaries. 
 
 
 6 
Taiwan has a strong economy and maintains significant economic contacts with 
China. For many years, Taiwan has also been an active collector of U.S. economic 
intelligence and technology, including dual-use technologies that have sensitive military 
applications. There have been numerous cases involving illegal export or attempted 
export of sensitive, dual-use technology to Taiwan. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
 
 7 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR sets forth three allegations under Guideline B. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that 
Applicant’s mother, father and sister are citizens and residents of Taiwan. SOR ¶ 1.b 
alleges that Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law are 
also citizens and residents of Taiwan. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant has three friends 
from his undergraduate years, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan and work in the 
technology industry. 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6, as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The evidence establishes the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
 8 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and  
 
AG ¶7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The Government’s evidence has established that Applicant’s foreign 
contacts, as well as his wife’s, create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. These relationships also 
constitute connections to foreign persons that creates a potential conflict of interest 
between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or 
technology and Applicant’s desire to help family members, in-laws, or friends by 
providing that information or technology. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply to 
Applicant’s relationships with the foreign contacts and connections alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) has not been established. With respect to Applicant’s immediate foreign 
family members and in-laws, he has not presented sufficient evidence to meet his burden 
of persuasion to mitigate the security concerns under this mitigating condition. His 
relationships with these foreign persons is sufficiently close and continuing and the 
country in which they are located raises serious security concerns so as to preclude a 
conclusion that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
 
 9 
between the interests of these foreign family members and the interests of the United 
States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has not been established. Applicant presented limited evidence of his 
ties to the United States. His evidence consists mainly of his post-graduate education in 
the United States, his 12 years of living in this country since the completion of his graduate 
studies, his five jobs during that period, and the births of his children in the United States. 
Although he and his wife have owned their home in the United States for the past eight 
years, Applicant provided no significant, additional information of a financial nature, or 
otherwise evidencing that he has deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in 
the United States. Applicant was a U.S. citizen for only five months before he applied for 
a security clearance. Furthermore, his sense of loyalty and obligation to his Taiwanese 
family members and in-laws is hardly minimal. Based upon Applicant’s limited evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns raised by his foreign connections, I cannot conclude that 
he has satisfied his burden of persuasion under this mitigating condition to establish that 
there is no conflict of interest and that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) has not been established with respect to his Taiwanese family members 
and his wife’s. Applicant has a close relationship with his immediate family members in 
Taiwan. Moreover, there is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant’s contacts with 
immediate family members are not casual. ADP Case No. 12-03783 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 
12, 2013); ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant has not 
rebutted this presumption. The same is true with respect to Applicant’s in-laws. “‘[T]here 
is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligations to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.’” ISCR Case No. 12-00084 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 22, 2014), quoting ISCR Case No. 12-07647 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). See 
also ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016) (the above-quoted rebuttable 
presumption is “well settled”). Applicant’s regular trips to Taiwan to visit family members 
further supports this conclusion. 
 
With respect to his three Taiwanese friends identified in his SCA and referred to in 
the SOR, the fact that Applicant and his friends work in the technology industry in Taiwan 
renders his contacts with his friends meaningful from a security standpoint. While I found 
some of Applicant’s testimony regarding his minimal contacts with his friends to be 
unpersuasive, I conclude that his contacts and communications with these friends are 
casual and infrequent. The mitigating condition set forth in AG ¶ 8(c) has been established 
with respect to the three friends, who are the subject of SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
 10 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some factors and evidence deserve 
further consideration. I have weighed Applicant’s renunciation of his Taiwanese 
citizenship. While this certainly evidences Applicant’s preference for the United States, it 
does not address the security concerns raised in this case under Guideline B, which are 
focused on the heightened risk of foreign exploitation of Applicant due to his close foreign 
contacts and those of his wife and the risk of a conflict of interest between the interests 
of his foreign relatives and the interests of the United States. As noted above, the record 
in this case establishes significant security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). I 
have also weighed the limited mitigating evidence provided by Applicant. As a new U.S. 
citizen as of the date of his SCA, he failed to provide significant evidence showing that he 
enjoys deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. I have also 
considered the testimony of Applicant that I have noted above to be less than fully candid. 
A lack of complete candidness and trustworthiness in an applicant’s hearing testimony 
weighs against one’s eligibility. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the circumstances of his foreign family 
members and his wife’s. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 11 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
 
