1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00857 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Allison R. Weber, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the  security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, Guideline G, alcohol consumption and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
Applicant answered (A1) the SOR on May 23, 2018, and requested a hearing. 
On August 20, 2018, an amended SOR was sent to Applicant adding allegations under 
02/08/2019
 
2 
 
 
Guidelines G and E. Applicant answered the amended SOR on September 13, 2018 
(A2). The case was assigned to me on September 18, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2018, and the 
hearing was held as scheduled on November 28, 2018. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection, except 
for GE 3, which objection was overruled. The Government’s Exhibit list was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of four witnesses. 
He provided five character letters, which were attached to his original answer (A1—
attachments). DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In A1, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.b, with explanations, and denied SOR ¶ 1.a. 
In A2, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 2.a, with explanations, and denied SOR ¶ 3.a. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He has never married and has no children. He has 
worked for a defense contractor since January 2016. Before his current position he was 
incarcerated in a state penitentiary for 28 months for felony aggravated assault. Upon 
his release from prison, he was placed on probation, which he successfully completed 
in February 2016. He has a high school diploma.1   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant discharged a firearm into an unoccupied vehicle in 
May 2012, which resulted in a citation for criminal damage (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleged 
that in August 2012, Applicant shot an associate in the face, pushed his body out of his 
truck, and fled the scene. He was charged with attempted first degree murder and 
aggravated assault. He pleaded guilty to aggravated assault and was sentenced to 
three and one-half years imprisonment (SOR ¶ 1.b). The amended SOR alleged that 
Applicant was under the influence of alcohol when he committed the acts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (SOR ¶ 2.a). Also in the amended SOR, all the above acts were 
cross-alleged as personal conduct under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 3.a).  
  
 On approximately May 10 and into May 11, 2012, Applicant and a friend (F) (who 
he described as his best friend at that time) were drinking alcohol at a friend’s house. 
Upon leaving the residence, rather than driving home, Applicant chose to sleep in his 
truck parked outside. The police were called when a neighbor’s car alarm went off. The 
police investigated noting that a car window was broken close to where Applicant’s truck 
was parked. Applicant was sleeping in his vehicle when the police approached him. He 
was questioned about whether he damaged the car window. Applicant appeared 
intoxicated to the officer. Applicant said he did not know if he broke the window, but that 
it was possible that he broke it. Applicant had a loaded pistol in his truck at the time of 
the incident. Evidence discovered at the scene included a shell casing next to the 
damaged car. Applicant was issued a citation for criminal damage to property. The case 
                                                          
1 Tr. 85, 95, 98; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
was disposed of through a civil compromise where Applicant paid the victims of his 
criminal damage and his criminal case was dismissed. His father paid the civil 
compromise fee on behalf of Applicant. Applicant admitted that alcohol played a part in 
this incident.2 
  
 In August 2012, Applicant and F engaged in an evening of drinking at various 
locations. Applicant claims F also used Xanax as well. Applicant claimed he drank at 
least seven alcoholic beverages and F drank more than that. After leaving a restaurant, 
Applicant and F drove away in Applicant’s truck. Applicant had two handguns in his 
truck, one in the center compartment, and one in the driver’s side compartment. 
Sometime late in the evening, Applicant and F began arguing. It reached the point that 
Applicant claimed that F reached into the center compartment and grabbed the gun. 
Applicant reacted by pulling the gun on the driver’s side and shooting F in the face, 
opening the passenger door, pushing F out, and driving away. He admitted using 
alcohol that night, but testified that he was in control of his senses when he shot F. 
Later, he was arrested by the police and charged with attempted first degree murder 
and two counts of aggravated assault. After consulting with his attorney, he decided to 
forego pursuing self-defense with a not guilty plea at trial. Instead, Applicant pleaded 
guilty to aggravated assault in May 2013, and was sentenced to three and one-half 
years in the state penitentiary. Upon completion of his sentence, he was placed on 
probation, which he successfully completed in February 2016. F survived the shooting, 
but has had multiple surgeries since the shooting. Applicant does not recall apologizing 
to F or his family at his sentencing hearing. He has not spoken to F since the incident. 
Applicant had no misconduct incidents while incarcerated and has had no law 
enforcement involvement since his release.3 
 
 Applicant admitted that he used alcohol before both the May and August 2012 
incidents. He did not receive any alcohol treatment or counseling while incarcerated. He 
continues to drink alcohol. The last time he was intoxicated was at a friend’s wedding 
about a year ago. He consumed about five drinks in five hours. He has not sought 
alcohol treatment or counseling since leaving prison.4  
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of three officers from his company (the vice 
president of finance, the chief operating officer, and the chief executive officer) at 
hearing. They also provided statements. All described the process of hiring Applicant for 
their IT position. They were aware of his legal issues when they hired him. Applicant’s 
father formerly worked for the same company and suggested him for the position. The 
officers knew there was risk involved should they hire Applicant. They decided to do so 
anyway. They universally believe the company has been rewarded many times over by 
hiring Applicant. He has earned more and more responsibility by performing in an 
                                                          
2 Tr. 58-59; GE 3, 5. 
 
3 Tr. 62, 65-66, 70, 82-85, 89-90, 95, 98-99; GE 2, 4-5. 
 
4 Tr. 74, 98-99. 
 
 
4 
 
 
outstanding manner. All the officers trust Applicant implicitly and all recommend the 
granting of his clearance.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20-23, 25, 34-37, 39-40, 44-52; A1--attachments. 
 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.  
 
Applicant was convicted of aggravated assault by shooting his friend in the face. 
He also was involved in criminal damage to private property, which was resolved 
through a civil payment to the victim. I find that the stated disqualifying condition 
applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Both of the criminal acts committed by Applicant involved his use and abuse of 
alcohol. Despite what has happened in the past, he continues to use alcohol. Although 
several years have passed since his criminal action, it cannot reasonably be determined 
that such behavior might not happen in the future since he still consumes alcohol, which 
obviously impaired his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment in the past. While 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is credited with some mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a), it is insufficient to 
overcome the disqualifying condition. Applicant should be commended for the strides he 
has made toward rehabilitation. However, his callousness in shooting his friend, pushing 
him out of his truck, and leaving him for dead is not overcome by his successful IT 
career since leaving prison. AG ¶ 32(d) does not fully apply.   
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Both of Applicant’s criminal acts involved his abuse of alcohol and support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant was sent to prison for over three years for shooting his best friend in 
the face. His use of alcohol contributed to his actions then. It was also a factor when he 
engaged in criminal damage to private property for which his father paid the victim. 
Despite these life-changing events due, in part, to his alcohol abuse, he continues to 
use alcohol. He admitted that he drank to intoxication within the last year. He received 
no alcohol counselling in prison and has sought none since then. Given these facts, 
none of the above mitigating circumstances apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 Between the language expressed in the general security concern in AG ¶15 and 
the specific concern expressed in AG ¶16(c),6 Applicant’s two criminal incidents in May 
and August 2012 raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following relevant:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
                                                          
6 The record evidence is sufficient for adverse determinations under both the criminal conduct and alcohol 
consumption guidelines, nevertheless, as a whole, Applicant’s actions put into issue his judgment, 
trustworthiness and overall personal conduct.  
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
 Appellant’s criminal act of shooting his friend in the face and leaving him for dead 
was not a minor incident. It casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
AG ¶17(c) does not apply. Applicant completed his prison sentence and follow-up 
probation without any issues. He has since achieved gainful employment and by all 
accounts is thriving in his job. However, because he still uses alcohol, it is too early to 
determine whether similar behavior is unlikely. Applicant receives some credit under AG 
¶ 17(d). 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s completion 
of probation, his letters of recommendation, the testimony of the officers of his 
company, and his father’s testimony. However, I also considered that he was convicted 
of aggravated assault when he shot his friend in the face and that alcohol was involved 
with both criminal incidents. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the criminal conduct, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines J, G and E. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph     2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph     3.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
