1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
[Name Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 18-01730 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly M. Folks, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
sometime in July or August 2018 (The SOR in the file is undated). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
On August 20, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 
11, 2018. On October 15, 2018, Applicant received the FORM. Applicant had 30 days to 
submit a response to the FORM. She timely submitted a response which is admitted as 
Item 12. Department Counsel had no objection to the documents Applicant submitted in 
response to the FORM. (Item 13) On November 16, 2018, the FORM was forwarded to 
the Hearing Office and assigned to me on January 25, 2019. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.    
02/01/2019
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since January 2015. Her highest 
level of education is a bachelor’s degree. She is married. (Item 3) 
 
On June 4, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing. (Item 3) A subsequent background investigation revealed 
Applicant had the following issues raised under the financial considerations concern: a 
federal tax lien entered against Applicant in December 2011, in the approximate amount 
of $51,434 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5); a $23,325 federal tax lien entered against Applicant in 
March 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 6; Item 7; Item 8 at 3), a $6,975 state tax lien entered 
against Applicant in March 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4); a $12,526 garnishment order 
entered against Applicant in January 2017 for a delinquent student loan (SOR ¶ 1.d: 
Item 11); a $385 medical account placed for collection in August 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 
8 at 7; Item 11 at 3). In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c -1.d, and denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.e.  With regard to 
the tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, Applicant admits she owes the federal tax 
debts. She disputes the total amount owed. (Item 2)  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant addressed each allegation as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, federal tax liens in the respective amounts of $51,434 and 
$23,325:  Applicant denies the amounts of the federal tax lien. She states that the 
current amount owed to the federal government is $41,845. She claims the debt was 
incurred because of unsatisfactory service from a former tax representative for tax years 
2006 to 2010. She is current on all tax filings and owes no federal taxes for tax years 
after 2010. In August 2018, she retained a tax law firm to submit an Offer in 
Compromise on her behalf. The tax debt will be paid in full if the Offer in Compromise is 
approved. She did not provide proof of the current balance of her federal income tax 
such as an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) transcript. (Item 2 at 1, 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: state tax lien in the amount of $6,975:  Applicant admits this debt. 
She is currently paying in a monthly installment agreement. She pays $147.73 each 
month. It is not clear when the installment agreement began. The balance as of July 30, 
2018, was $6,499. Applicant did not provide additional proof of payments towards the 
monthly installment agreement. (Item 2 at 1, 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $12,526 garnishment entered in January 2017:  Applicant denies this 
debt because she disputes the $12,526 balance. She claims her wages were garnished 
in the amount of $7,315. She claims she entered a successful loan payment program 
agreement in January 2018. She provided a statement from the Department of 
Education, dated September 12, 2017, indicating she successfully completed a student 
loan rehabilitation program. Her loan is now being processed for a new repayment 
program. She did not provide additional evidence about the repayment program and  
 
3 
 
 
proof that she is making timely monthly payments towards the program. It is unclear 
whether the garnishment order was satisfied. (Item 2 at 2, 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $385 medical debt placed for collection: Applicant disputed this debt 
with a credit reporting agency, denying that it was her debt. The debt was successfully 
removed from her credit report. (Item 2 at 1, 6)  
 
In her response to FORM, dated November 1, 2018, Applicant states that she 
currently owes the IRS approximately $38,068. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). She provided a 
typed statement summarizing what she owes for tax years 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2011. 
It summarizes her federal tax debts as: 
 
2007 – Balance $7,811 – Substitute return filed by the IRS – Ten year 
Statute of Limitations (SOL) expires on February 11, 2021. 
 
2008 – Balance $11,170 – Taxpayer filed return – SOL expires September 
29, 2022.  
 
2009 – Balance $12,099 – Taxpayer filed return – SOL expires September 
29, 2022. 
 
2010 – Balance $7,559 - Taxpayer filed return – SOL expires September 
29, 2022. 
 
2011 – Returns not file, but no requirement to file.  
 
Total $38,068 (Actually the total is approximately $38,639)  
 
The author of the statement is unclear. There is no indication when Applicant 
filed the tax returns for 2008, 2009, and 2010. She did not file a tax return for 2007.  
Applicant did not provide the actual transcripts from the IRS, which provide detailed 
information about each tax year. Her attorney intends to submit an Offer in Compromise 
for $2,400. If the Offer in Compromise is accepted, Applicant will pay it in full.  
(Response to FORM)  
 
Regarding the $6,975 state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant claims her 
employer failed to deduct sufficient state taxes resulting in a tax debt that she could not 
afford to pay in one lump sum. She entered into a repayment agreement with the state 
in 2018. She claims she has met the terms of the repayment agreement. Applicant did 
not provide receipts or an updated payment history from the state department of 
revenue verifying that she is making payments or that she satisfied the debt.  
 
Applicant states that she is now in a payment agreement regarding the student 
loan debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) and that balance will be paid off by 2020. She did not provide a 
copy of the payment agreement or proof that payments were being made on a timely 
basis.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance for over 20 years without any issues. She 
states she is living within her means and remains current on all financial obligations.  
She believes she should be eligible to maintain her security clearance.  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f)  failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.   
  
All of the above disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant owes 
approximately $6,975 as a result of state tax lien filed against her in March 2016. She 
also owes significant federal tax debts for tax years 2007 to 2010, which resulted in tax 
liens being filed against her in 2011 for $51,434 and 2012 for $23,325. Her wages were 
garnished in January 2017 for a $12,526 delinquent student loan debt. Credit reports 
also showed a $385 medical collection account.    
 
The security concern under Financial Considerations is broader than the 
possibility that a person might knowingly compromise classified information to obtain 
money or something else of value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-
control, judgment, and other important qualities.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
financial counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the disputes or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial issues are ongoing. She 
is in the process of entering into repayment plans for her federal tax debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
– 1.b) and student loan (SOR ¶ 1.d). She is in a repayment program for her state tax 
debt. (SOR ¶ 1.c) It is too soon to conclude that Applicant has demonstrated a track 
record of making timely payments towards her delinquent debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because there were no conditions beyond Applicant’s 
control which adversely affected her finances.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies because Applicant successfully completed a 
rehabilitation plan regarding her student loan and is attempting to resolve her federal  
and state tax debts.  However, she ignored her obligations to pay her tax debts for 
years, which gives this mitigating condition less weight. Applicant did not provide 
documentation regarding her repayment plan for her student loan or proof that she is 
timely making payments towards her student loan. It is too early to conclude that 
Applicant has established a sufficient track record of paying her federal and state tax 
debts.   
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies with respect the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant  
formally disputed the debt and it was removed from her credit report.   
 
AG ¶ 20(g) partially applies because Applicant appears to be repaying her state 
tax debt. She is in the process of submitted on Offer in Compromise to the IRS.  She 
ignored her federal tax debts for years.  She did not hire an attorney to submit an Offer 
in Compromise until August 2018, shortly after the SOR was issued. Her federal tax 
debt remains unresolved. For this reason, this mitigating condition is given less weight.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s employment history as a DoD contractor for over 20 
years. I considered that she is married. While Applicant is in the process of submitting 
an Offer in Compromise regarding the IRS debt, it is premature to conclude Applicant’s 
federal tax debts will be resolved. A person entrusted with access to classified 
information, is expected to follow the duties expected of every U.S. citizen, which 
includes timely paying federal income taxes. Applicant incurred federal tax debts for tax 
years 2007 – 2010.  She did not attempt to resolve her federal tax debts until August 
2018, shortly after the SOR was issued.  It is too soon to conclude that Applicant will 
 
8 
 
 
resolve her federal and state income tax debts and her student loan. At this time, the 
security concerns raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
