1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02199 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: J. Nathan Overstreet, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On September 27, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 18, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on the same 
day. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 17, 2019. The Government offered 
02/25/2019
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) A through C. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 
through 10. There were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were 
admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on January 28, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibits I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications that were provided as 
part of the exhibit.1 The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He completed high school 
and college there. He is married and has six children, four girls and two boys. He served 
as an officer in the Afghan Army from 1980 to 1992. He served as an infantry instructor. 
In 1992, the Afghan Army sent Applicant to Uzbekistan to attend law school. He moved 
there with his wife and four children at the time. He earned a law degree. He does not 
maintain contact with any members of the Afghan military.2 
 
While living in Uzbekistan, Applicant and his wife had two more children, 
daughters. During that period, Afghanistan was invaded by the Soviet Union, and 
Applicant could not return to his home country. In 2005, he and his family were granted 
asylum by the United States, left Uzbekistan, and immigrated to the United States. In 
2009, Applicant began working as a cultural affairs advisor and was employed by several 
federal contractors until 2014, when he and many of the cultural advisors, were laid off. 
In 2015, he opened a business with a friend. It was unsuccessful. In 2016, he went back 
to work for the U.S. Government, and has since been working as a linguist. He speaks 
four languages. He was deployed to Afghanistan from April 2018 to January 2019. 
Because of his duties with the U.S. Government, he did not visit his family during this 
deployment.3  
 
In 2011, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s four eldest children, who 
were born in Afghanistan, also became U.S. citizens in 2011. His two youngest children 
                                                          
1 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 29-36, 96-98. 
 
3 Tr. 36-50, GE A. 
 
3 
 
 
became U.S. citizens in 2015, and his wife became a U.S. citizen in 2016. All of them 
have U.S. passports. None have retained foreign passports or Afghan citizenship.4 
 
Applicant’s eldest son is mentally disabled. His other son works as a linguist for a 
U.S. military contractor in Afghanistan. He lives on a U.S. military base. He is married to 
an Afghan citizen, and they have one child.  
 
In 2016, Applicant’s wife moved to Afghanistan. Two adult daughters and their 
disabled son also moved back to Afghanistan with her. Because Applicant’s wife, son, 
and two daughters had previously been citizens of Afghanistan, they were not required to 
obtain an Afghan visa, which is normally required. They do not possess any type of 
Afghan identification cards. Applicant testified that most people are unaware of his wife 
and children’s citizenship status. However, some of her neighbors are aware that they 
are U.S. citizens. One daughter, who accompanied her mother, suffers from depression 
and was advised by her doctor to go with her mother to help improve her mental health.  
 
Applicant testified that his wife moved back to Afghanistan for two reasons. First, 
his elderly father needed care and secondly, their son and his wife lived there. His son’s 
wife and child live in the same apartment as Applicant’s wife. Due to his job, his son is 
required to live on base. Applicant’s son provides his wife and son financial support. His 
paycheck is deposited directly into his bank account in the United States and then his 
younger sisters, who have access to the account, wires money to his wife. Applicant’s 
son’s wife is an Afghan citizen.5 
 
Applicant’s other daughter who returned to Afghanistan, married in 2017. Her 
husband, an Afghan citizen, has worked for a U.S. contractor in Afghanistan for about five 
years. They have one child. Applicant testified that this daughter has applied for her 
husband to come to the United States with her when she returns. It is unknown when she 
intends to return.6 
 
Applicant’s father died in October 2018. Applicant testified that his wife plans on 
returning to the United States, along with their disabled son and daughter. They do not 
yet have plane tickets to return. Applicant is their sole source of financial support. 
Applicant’s two youngest daughters, who are college students and live in the United 
States, have access to their father’s account. They wire money to their mother from their 
father’s account in the United States for her financial needs. Their mother retrieves the 
money by going to the transfer office and showing her U.S. passport. Applicant has not 
visited his wife since 2017. He was not permitted to visit her or his children when he was 
deployed to Afghanistan in 2018. He maintains contact with her by telephone.7  
                                                          
4 Tr. 40-42, 98-100-101. 
 
5 Tr. 68, 100-109, 130-131-136. Applicant testified that the Afghan Government changed the rule, waiving 
the requirement of a visa for former citizens. Applicant testified that his son has a security clearance.  
 
6 Tr. 68-75, 141. 
 
7 Tr. 21-29, 51-54, 68-77-78, 81-82, 125-127. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s two youngest daughters share an apartment, and Applicant provides 
them financial support. They both intend on remaining in the United States after they 
graduate from college. Applicant stays with them when he is the United States.8 
 
Applicant’s mother predeceased his father many years earlier. Applicant did not 
inherit any property from his father. His father had 10 children with Applicant’s mother 
and six children with his stepmother. Seven of Applicant’s siblings are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. The other three siblings live in Germany, India, and Australia. 
All of his siblings living in Afghanistan are married and have children who also live there. 
One brother is employed in the Afghan ministry of agriculture. The last time Applicant 
visited this brother was in 2016. Applicant’s wife visits Applicant’s siblings sometimes 
because they live in the same city. Applicant does not have contact with his stepbrothers 
and stepsisters. He does not provide support to any of his siblings or step-siblings. 
Applicant has a brother-in-law who was a colonel in the Afghan military. He retired a 
couple of years ago and receives a military pension.9  
 
Applicant traveled to Afghanistan with his family in 2014, 2015, and 2016 to visit 
his father and family. In 2017 he traveled there with his youngest daughters to visit his 
immediate and extended family. They stayed for about a month. While there he visited 
some siblings. He does not have contact his siblings throughout the year, but does when 
he is in the country and visits them.10  
 
In about 2004, Applicant met an Afghan citizen when he lived in Uzbekistan. He 
had a casual social acquaintance with him because they were both Afghans. They 
greeted each other on three to four occasions, but they were not friends. In approximately 
2015, this person was appointed as the Afghan ambassador to Uzbekistan. When 
Applicant became aware of this person’s appointment to ambassador, he sent him a 
congratulatory note on Facebook. This was the extent of their contact.11 
 
Applicant does not provide financial support to any family members in Afghanistan 
except his immediate family. He does not provide financial support to his children’s 
friends, who are citizens and residents in Afghanistan. In approximately 2016 or 2017, he 
loaned $500 to a distant relative. The relative repaid him.12  
 
Applicant does not own a home in Afghanistan or the United States. When in the 
United States, he stays with his daughters in their rented apartment. He intends to retire 
                                                          
 
8 Tr. 21-29, 51, 54, 68-74, 80-82, 129-154. 
 
9 Tr. 57-67, 83-86, 109-114, 124, 127. 
 
10 Tr. 60-67, 78-79, 125. 
 
11 Tr. 86-89, 119-123. 
 
12 Tr. 114-119, 127-128. 
 
 
5 
 
 
in about five years and live in the United States. He provided an undated letter of 
appreciation from a military commander for his service as a cultural advisor.13 
 
Afghanistan14 
 
 The United States Department of State’s travel warning for Afghanistan remains in 
effect and it warns U.S. citizens against travel there because of continued instability and 
threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel there is unsafe due to 
ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, and armed rivalry 
between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, suicide bombings, and insurgent 
attacks. These attacks may also target Afghan and U.S. Government convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas.  
 
As recently as December 2018, the U.S. Embassy in Kabul warned U.S. citizens 
in Afghanistan of reports that militants plan to conduct attacks against hotels, compounds, 
international organizations, universities, airports and other locations frequented by U.S. 
citizens and other foreign nationals.  
 
Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by 
different terrorist groups. These groups remain active and were able to conduct a number 
of high-profile, mass-casualty attacks in Kabul against sectarian and Afghan government 
targets. They continue to plan such attacks against U.S. and coalition forces and Afghan 
interests. Border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. 
The Afghan government struggles to assert control over this remote region.  
 
According to a June 2017 U.S. Department of Defense report on Afghanistan, 
Afghanistan faces a continuing threat from as many as 20 insurgent and terrorist networks 
present and operating in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, in what is the highest 
concentration of extremist and terrorist groups in the world. 
 
 The State Department’s report on human rights for Afghanistan notes there was 
widespread violence, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians and killings of persons 
affiliated with the government by armed insurgent groups, widespread disregard for the 
rule of law and little accountability for those who committed human rights abuses. There 
was also targeted violence and endemic societal discrimination against women and girls.  
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
13 Tr. 90-92, 123-124; AE 10. 
 
14 HE I. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
7 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.15  
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against 
U.S. citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Afghanistan. Recent 
threats are directed toward U.S. citizens. Extremists groups are active throughout 
Afghanistan and terrorist threats are a serious concern.  
 
Applicant, his wife, and four of his six children were born in Afghanistan. They 
subsequently became U.S. citizens. In 2016 Applicant’s wife, their eldest son, and two 
adult daughters moved back to Afghanistan. Their other son resides in Afghanistan with 
his wife and child. Since she returned, Applicant’s adult daughter married an Afghan 
citizen and has a child. Applicant’s two youngest children live in the United States. From 
2013 to 2016, Applicant and his family returned to Afghanistan each year to visit his father 
and other family members. He and his two youngest daughters returned in 2017 to visit 
                                                          
15 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen or resident of a 
foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, depending on the facts 
and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
their immediate and extended family. Applicant’s contacts with his spouse and children, 
who are residents of Afghanistan, and his daughter-in-law, son-in-law, two grandchildren, 
and numerous siblings and their families, who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan, 
create a heightened risk. AG ¶ 7(a) applies.16   
 
I find Applicant does not have sufficient contact with his stepmother or stepsiblings 
to create a heightened risk. His father is deceased and no longer raises a concern. AG ¶ 
7(a) does not apply to these people.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant provided financial support 
to his children’s friends. There is sufficient evidence that he provides substantial financial 
support to his wife and unmarried children living in Afghanistan. Applicant’s family residing 
in Afghanistan, his familial obligations and financial support to them creates a potential 
conflict of interest and a foreign influence concern. AG ¶ 7(b) applies.  
 
Applicant’s contact with the Afghan ambassador to Uzbekistan was insubstantial 
and more of a courtesy than a friendship. His contact does not rise to the level of a 
heightened risk or create a conflict of interest. I find no disqualifying condition applies. I 
find in Applicant’s favor for SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s wife, two sons, two daughters, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, two 
grandchildren, seven siblings and their spouses are all residents of Afghanistan. His wife 
                                                          
16 Applicant’s grandchildren are U.S. citizen because one of their parents is a citizen. It is unknown if they 
also hold Afghan citizenship because they were born in Afghanistan and their other parent is an Afghan 
citizen.  
 
9 
 
 
and children living there are citizens of the United States. They moved back to 
Afghanistan in 2016. There is significant evidence that terrorist groups target U.S. citizens 
living in Afghanistan. Some of Applicant’s wife’s neighbors are aware that she and her 
family are U.S. citizens. In order for her to retrieve money that has been wired to her, she 
must show her U.S. passport. Based on Applicant’s significant personal contacts in 
Afghanistan and the heightened security threats for U.S. citizens living there, I am unable 
to find that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of his family and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does 
not apply.  
 
Applicant worked as a cultural advisor for the U.S. Government from 2009 to 2014 
when he was laid off. He was hired again in 2017 and deployed to Afghanistan in 2018. 
His son works as a contractor in Afghanistan. His son-in-law also works for a U.S. 
contractor. He provided a letter of appreciation from a military commander for his service 
as a cultural advisor. He has two daughters living in the United States. These are all facts 
that must be weighed against all of the other facts. Applicant has a minimal financial 
interest in the United States. His wife and three of his children moved back to Afghanistan 
in 2016. They have not returned to the United States. Applicant believes they will in the 
future, but when that may occur is unknown. He indicated his wife moved there to care 
for his father, who is now deceased. She also moved there to be closer to her son who is 
married with a child. One daughter, who moved with her, is now married to an Afghan 
national and has a child. Applicant testified that she has applied to have him move with 
her back to the United States. Applicant has numerous siblings with whom his wife 
maintains some contact. Applicant visits some of them when he is in the country  
 
Applicant is a dedicated family man. He is a dutiful father who provides for his 
family financially. I have considered Applicant’s loyalty, devotion, and commitment when 
working with federal contractors in the United States and his recent mission to 
Afghanistan. However, with Applicant’s immediate family, including his wife, four children, 
their spouses, two grandchildren, and his multiple siblings all living in Afghanistan, his ties 
there are too significant at this time. He does not have financial interests in the United 
States and his only personal ties are his two youngest daughters. Afghanistan continues 
to have significant terrorist activity that specifically targets both Afghans and Americans. 
Applicant’s close relationship with his family in Afghanistan, his visits to see his family, 
and his financial support for them is commendable. Given those connections, it is too 
great of a burden to expect him to be loyal to the interests of the United States and resolve 
any conflicts in favor of the United States over those of family. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant and his family traveled yearly from 2013 to 2016 to visit their family in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his youngest daughters visited his family in Afghanistan in 
2017. They visited for a month. While there, he had some contact with his siblings. 
Applicant provides financial support to his wife and unmarried children living in 
Afghanistan. His contact with his family members is not casual or infrequent. Insufficient 
evidence was produced to apply AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2011. His 
immediate family are naturalized citizens of the United States. All but his two youngest 
daughters, live in Afghanistan. I have given considerable weight to Applicant’s service 
and commitment to the United States, but it is not outweighed by his deep familial ties 
and loyalty to his closest family members. This situation may be minimized when his 
immediate family returns to the United States. Until then, the heightened risks raised by 
those familial ties in Afghanistan continue to raise significant security concerns under 
Guideline B and are unmitigated. At this time, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.e:    For Applicant 
  
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
