1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00832 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 Statement of the Case 
On November 4, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On April 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information; 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines issued by the Director of National 
Intelligence, effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.1 
1 GE 1, 3. 
02/01/2019
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2018. He admitted six of the SOR 
allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e-1.h), and he denied the others (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
and 1.i). He submitted a document in reference to SOR ¶ 1.a with his response to the 
SOR. Applicant requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.2  
 
 On July 16, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 17, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 45 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant received the FORM on July 23, 
2018, but he did not respond to the FORM. He did not object to Items 1 through 9, 
which I marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-9, and admitted into evidence. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 
29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 57 years old. He has 
been employed full time with a Federal contractor since August 2011. He divorced in 
1986 and re-married in 1992. He has an adult daughter and two adult step-children. He 
earned two honorable discharges with the U.S. Air Force, in 1984 and 2003.3  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent accounts totaling just over $44,000.00, which 
are supported by credit reports submitted by the Government.4 In Applicant's response 
to the SOR, he failed to provide any explanation for his financial issues or what plans he 
had, if any, to resolve his outstanding debts. The record establishes the status of 
Applicant’s accounts as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges an outstanding car loan account for a vehicle had been 
repossessed for nonpayment of $23,828. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
attached a document which appears to be a settlement offer from the creditor. The 
creditor noted that Applicant's overdue balance was $16,432, but if he agreed to pay a 
settlement of $9,859, the creditor would annotate the account as resolved. There is no 
evidence that Applicant paid, or is in the process of resolving, this outstanding account. 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 GE 5, 6, 7, 8. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a student loan account that is more than 180 days past due in the 
amount of $630, with a loan balance of $5,514. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted this account, but he did not provide any documentation to show that the 
student loan is current, or if he is in the process of paying this delinquent debt. This debt 
has not been resolved.  [I moved this para. up one line.] 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges an account referred for collection in the amount of $822. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this account, but he did not provide any 
documentation to show that the delinquent account is current, or if he is in the process 
of resolving this debt. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a cell phone service account referred for collection in the 
amount of $462. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this account. He failed to 
provide any explanation or documentation to show that the delinquent account is 
current, or he is in the process of resolving this debt. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges an account referred for collection in the amount of $87. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this account, but he did not provide any 
documentation to show that the delinquent account is current, or if he is in the process 
of resolving this debt. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f appears to be a time share account that is more than 120 days past 
due in the amount of $8,506, with a loan balance of $8,844. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted this account, but he did not provide any documentation to show that 
the delinquent account is current, or if he is in the process of paying this debt. This debt 
has not been resolved.  
 
In 2010, a judgment was filed against Applicant, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, in the 
amount of $4,050. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this judgment, but he 
did not provide any information to indicate that he is either paying, paid, or in the 
process of resolving this unsatisfied judgment. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a clothing account referred for collection in the amount of 
$839. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this account, but he did not 
provide any documentation to show that the delinquent account is current, or he is in the 
process of resolving this debt. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a utility account referred for collection in the amount of $106. In 
his response to the SOR, Applicant denied this account. He failed to provide any 
explanation or documentation to show that the delinquent account is current, or he is in 
the process of resolving this debt. This debt has not been resolved. 
 
Department Counsel noted in his brief, that: “Absent documentary evidence 
submitted in response to this FORM that Applicant has acted responsibly and in 
good-faith to satisfy his delinquent debts and established a sustained track 
record of financial responsibility, the unmitigated SOR allegations establish a 
 
4 
 
 
basis for disqualification…."5 Despite the clear warning, Applicant did not submit any 
mitigating evidence within the 45-day time period after receipt of the Government 
FORM. He did not provide information concerning a budget or other information related 
to his financial obligations from which to determine his current financial circumstances.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Department Counsel FORM brief page 3. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The above disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant has approximately $44,000 
of delinquent debt that is unpaid and unresolved, as shown on his credit reports. In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
   
 There is insufficient evidence to apply any of the mitigating conditions. Applicant 
denied three of the nine delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.i. He did 
not provide any explanation for his denials, and he did not provide any supporting 
documentation to show that his disputes, if any, with creditors are legitimate. He did not 
provide proof of his communication with these creditors, if any, in an effort to resolve the 
disputed accounts. Applicant admitted responsibility for the other six debts alleged, but 
he failed to provide any evidence to show that he is paying, resolving, or has paid any of 
those debts. There is no evidence to show Applicant received financial counseling or 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances in dealing with his creditors.  
   
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust with the Government. An applicant is 
not required to be debt-free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial 
obligations. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide supporting documentation to mitigate his delinquent 
accounts and he failed to demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances in dealing with his creditors. There is no showing by Applicant of any 
effort to pay, legitimately dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the financial security 
concerns. Applicant has not provided a financial plan or a detailed budget of his current 
financial circumstances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s good 
judgment, reliability as well as eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Because 
protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
unresolved doubts must be resolved against the granting of eligibility to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
