       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ----------------------------------        )       ISCR  Case No.  18-01601   
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se      
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
02/27/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 25, 2018, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on October 14, 2018, interposed no objections to the materials in the
FORM, and did not supplement the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 8,
2019. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) had a tax lien entered against him in
January 2012 for $2,636; (b) is indebted to a lender on a home equity loan for $27,083;
(c) is indebted on a mortgage account that went to foreclosure in 2013; and (d) is
indebted on a mortgage account that went to foreclosure in 2016. Allegedly, the debts
owing have not been resolved and remain outstanding. 
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with 
explanations. He claimed the tax lien covered by SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. He claimed that
the home equity loan covered by SOR ¶ 1.b is in the process of being resolved. He
further claimed that the foreclosure covered by SOR ¶ 1.c , for which he was a co-signor
on a loan made to his mother; he claimed the property was sold due to family
circumstances involving his mother and her husband. And he claimed that the foreclosure
covered by SOR ¶ 1.d went to foreclosure  because of his loss of employment. Applicant
attached a copy of the state tax lien released in July 2018, along with a copy of the
charged-off home equity account covered by SOR ¶ 1.b.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old mechanic for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first wife in January 1998 and divorced her in February 1999.
(Item 3) He has one child from this marriage. He remarried in February 2002 and has no
children from this marriage. Applicant earned an associate’s degree in August 1996 and
reported no military service. (Item 3)
Since August 2016, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Item 3)
Between July 2002 and August 2016, he was employed by various employers in
mechanic positions, interspersed with brief periods of unemployment. (Item 3) 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2012 and 2015, Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts totaling
approximately $29,719. (Items 5-6)  One of the debts (SOR debt ¶ 1.a) was a state tax
lien that has since been resolved. (Items 2 and 4) Another listed debt (SOR debt ¶ 1.b)
2
was a delinquent home equity loan that was charged off In the approximate amount of
$27,083. (Items 5-6) This loan has not been addressed to date and remains outstanding. 
Besides accruing the two referenced delinquent debts, Applicant incurred two
foreclosures: one in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c) and another in 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.d) The first of the
two foreclosures involved a mortgage on which he co-signed a note for $206,450 in
January 2004 to finance a home for his mother. (Items 5-6) This mortgage was foreclosed
in 2013 following family differences between Applicant’s mother and her husband.
Applicant could not reconcile with his mother, and she moved out of the house, leaving
the husband, who defaulted on the loan, still residing in the residence. (Items 2-6) The
second foreclosure covered a rental property that Applicant financed in 2011 for $74,503
that he could no longer afford due to unemployment. (Items 2-6) Whether either of the
foreclosures resulted in deficiency balances is unclear. 
To date. Applicant has failed to document any progress in addressing his
delinquent SOR ¶ 1.b debt. Absent proof of payment, or payment plan, of the home equity
loan covered by SOR ¶ 1.b, no favorable inferences can be drawn regarding Applicant’s
addressing of this debt. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
3
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
4
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of two delinquent
debts (one a state tax lien for $2,636 and another a delinquent home equity loan)
totaling more than $29,000, and his incurring of two foreclosures on loans he assumed
responsibility for in 2004 and 2011, respectively. Applicant’s debt delinquencies and
twin foreclosures warrant the application of four of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 b), “unwillingness to satisfy
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Applicant’s admitted delinquent debts and foreclosures negate the need for any
independent proof. See Directive 5220.6 at E3.1.14; McCormick on Evidence, § 262
(6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s admitted state tax lien, home equity loan deficiency,
and two foreclosures are fully documented and create some judgment issues. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses
and debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of addressing and resolving federal and state tax
delinquencies and other debt delinquencies are critical to an assessment of an
applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and
guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a
sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR
Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating
circumstances (i.e., unemployment) provide some mitigation credit for his failure to
timely file address his state tax obligations and other debts when they came due. The
cited circumstances he attributes to his debt delinquencies are enough to entitle him to
some extenuating benefits from MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
5
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  But his failure to address his
other debts after he returned to full time employment status precludes him from taking
advantage of the “acted responsibly” prong of MC ¶ 20(b)
Similarly, satisfaction of Applicant’s evidentiary burden of providing probative
evidence of his addressing his home equity delinquency and two mortgage foreclosures
requires more documentation of his payment efforts and mortgage history than he has
provided in his submissions. While his tax lien satisfaction is encouraging, it is not
enough by itself to mitigate his financial delinquencies without more evidence of a
seasoned payment history.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely resolution of
federal and state tax debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
In Applicant’s case, his failures or inability to establish payment histories with three of
his covered creditors (excepting his resolution of the state tax lien covered by SOR ¶
1.a) after the initiation of the security clearance process prelude favorable findings and
conclusions with respect to raised security concerns over the state of his finances. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his home equity loan delinquency and the payment
histories behind his two listed foreclosures to merit enough positive overall credit to
mitigate financial concerns.
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances reflect too little
evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable
doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information.
See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are not sufficiently stabilized
at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is
inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant
                 Subparagraph 1.b-1.d:                           Against Applicant
6
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
  
8
