1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01134 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that she has been financially 
responsible and that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 1, 2015. 
She was interviewed by government investigators in April and July, 2016, and submitted 
responses to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) interrogatories in 
March 2018. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) 
on April 27, 2018, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Applicant answered the SOR (undated), submitted documentary 
evidence, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from DOHA. 
DOHA initially assigned the case to other administrative judge and issued a 
notice of hearing on October 18, 2018, setting the hearing for November 6, 2018. 
DOHA reassigned the case to me on October 30, 2018. At the hearing, the Government 
offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted four exhibits (AE 1 through 4). AE 4 was received post-hearing. All exhibits 
02/08/2019
 
2 
 
 
were admitted as evidence without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 15, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. She denied SOR 
allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f through 1.i. Her admissions to the SOR allegations, and 
those at her hearing, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She completed a 
bachelor’s degree in communications in 2005 and a master’s degree in adult learning 
and instructional technology in 2010. Applicant married in 2007 and divorced in 2009. 
She has a thirteen-year-old daughter of this marriage. She married her current husband 
in 2013 and now has a step-child. 
 
Applicant has been consistently employed since 2005. She worked for a bank 
between 2005 and 2009, for the Army between 2008 and 2011 (overlapping jobs), and 
for the Air Force between 2011 and 2014. A federal contractor hired Applicant in June 
2014 and is currently sponsoring the continuation of her clearance. She is a senior 
consultant and supervises two employees. She travels frequently to different military 
installations to teach a new accounting system. (Tr. 24) She was first granted a secret 
clearance in 2008, which has been continued to present. 
 
Applicant disclosed in her 2015 SCA that she had financial problems, including 
about $28,000 in delinquent student loans (received during 2006 and 2007), and 
delinquent accounts placed for collection or charged off, allegedly resulting from her 
2009 divorce. She also disclosed that she travelled to Panama to visit family and friends 
for about a week each time in 2007 and 2012. She was questioned about her delinquent 
debts during her April and July 2016 interviews, some of which are alleged in the SOR. 
The status of the debts alleged in the SOR is as follows: 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a charged-off car loan owing $18,535. Applicant admitted 
this debt. She presented documentary evidence of one $500 payment made in July 
2016 and one $500 payment made in October 2018. She claimed the debt was reduced 
to $12,905 when she turned in the car to the creditor (sometime in 2016-2017), and that 
she had made a payment arrangement to satisfy the debt. Applicant testified that “every 
two months I have been attempting to make $500 payments to decrease the balance.” 
(Tr. 27) She presented no documentary evidence to show the debt has been reduced to 
$13,000, that she settled it or established a payment arrangement, or that she made 
any additional payments to satisfy the debt. This debt is unresolved. 
 
2. SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($10,328) and 1.c ($7,947) alleged delinquent student loans. 
Applicant denied she owed any money to the two alleged collection agencies, but she 
admitted that she owed four student loans that were currently in forbearance. The 
documentary evidence shows Applicant obtained the loans in 2006 and 2007, and they 
 
3 
 
 
became delinquent for lack of payment. In about 2014, she entered into a rehabilitation 
program, the student loans were purchased by other creditor, and the new creditor 
placed the four student loans in forbearance. (AE 4) Applicant claimed she is trying to 
make consistent payments on all her student loans, but she failed to submit 
documentary evidence to corroborate her claim of payments made. The student loans 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are resolved, but Applicant still owes over $31,000 in 
student loans that are currently in forbearance. 
 
3. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e alleged delinquent credit-card accounts owing $2,469 and 
$2,174, respectively, to the same creditor. Applicant admitted these were her accounts 
and stated that the debts were delinquent because her “ex-spouse [was] not fulfilling 
divorce obligations to make the payments on the accounts.” (SOR answer) I note that 
the divorce decree in evidence (AE 1) has no provisions concerning the allocation of 
marital assets or debts. 
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that she entered into a $740 settlement 
agreement with the creditor for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and $652 to pay off 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Both settlement agreements require Applicant to pay off 
the money not later than June 2019. Applicant claimed she made partial payments on 
both accounts and that she only owes $350 and $300 (respectively) to pay off the 
accounts. She presented no documentary evidence of any payments made in 
accordance with the settlement agreement.  
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.f alleged a $1,711 delinquent debt owed to a telecommunications 
provider, in collection by another company. SOR ¶ 1.g alleged a $467 delinquent debt 
owed to the same telecommunications provider. Applicant discussed both debts with a 
government background investigator during her April 2016 interview. She believed both 
debts were the same, but they were alleged twice. She told the investigator that this 
was a joint account opened by her and her ex-husband. She claimed that he was 
supposed to pay the accrued debt after the divorce and failed to do so. She promised to 
contact the creditor and make payment arrangements. (GE 2) She presented no 
documentary evidence to show she contacted the creditor, or that she made any 
payments to resolve the debt. 
 
Subsequently, Applicant disputed both debts through the credit bureau. (GE 5) 
She stated in her SOR answer: “I deny [these] claims because [they were] deemed 
fraudulent after investigation by the credit bureaus. Apparently, the debts were removed 
from her credit report as a result of her dispute.  
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.h alleged a $321 delinquent debt owed to a telecommunications 
provider, in collection by another company. During her April 2016 interview, Applicant 
disputed the debt, stating that she did not recognize the creditor, and indicated she 
would dispute it through the credit bureau. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated 
that she had paid the original creditor, and she was disputing the collections agency’s 
claim. She presented no documentary evidence of any payments made or disputes 
filed. 
 
4 
 
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.i alleged a $293 delinquent debt in collection. The documentary 
evidence shows Applicant paid $190 towards the debt, and it is no longer reflected on 
recent credit reports. 
 
Applicant believes she has done her best to mitigate her delinquent debts. She 
averred that she stays on track with her finances and keeps everything in order. She 
believes she has “turned a leaf” with respect to her finances. She attempted to reach all 
of her creditors and to establish payment agreements. She tries to make all of her debt 
payments on time, and does not overextend herself financially. Her intention has always 
been to satisfy her debts. She believes she is making a decent amount of money (about 
$5,000 monthly after taxes) and her income-to-debt ratio is sufficient for her to pay her 
living expenses and her debts. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2012 divorce, and she said that 
she was a victim of identity theft. She failed to present documentary evidence to show 
she was a victim of identity theft. She believes she has taken the necessary steps to 
correct her financial problems. She enrolled in credit-monitoring and credit-counseling 
programs, and placed a lock on her credit. She promised to continue making payments 
on time and stay on top of her financial situation. She believes that she has matured 
and is now financially stable.  
 
Applicant considers her current financial situation to be good. She lives within her 
financial means, and is trying to repair her credit. She believes she has changed and is 
now a financially responsible person. She promised to repair her credit and to be 
financially responsible.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), 
implemented by Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which are effective June 
8, 2017, which are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 
2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
 
5 
 
 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. Between 
2006 and 2007, she obtained four student loans that became delinquent. Additionally, 
she had seven delinquent consumer accounts that were in collection or charged off. AG 
 
6 
 
 
¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the above disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 Some of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are partially raised by 
the facts in this case; however, they do not mitigate the security concerns. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not fully applicable because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. AG 
¶ 20(b) is partially applicable, but does not mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s 
divorce is a circumstance beyond her control that likely contributed to her financial 
problems. I also considered that she was a single mother raising a child with limited 
support. Notwithstanding, her evidence is insufficient to establish that she was 
financially responsible under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant should have been more diligent addressing her delinquent debts 
sooner, contacting her creditors, and paying her debts. She has been continually 
employed since 2005. She started working for the federal government in 2008, and was 
granted a secret clearance. She submitted an SCA to renew her clearance in 2015, and 
shortly thereafter, she was interviewed twice concerning her financial problems. Her 
experience holding a clearance, submitting SCA, and the interviews placed Applicant on 
notice that her financial problems created a security concern. Applicant promised to 
take care of her financial problems and claimed she had contacted her creditors and 
established payment agreements. Applicant’s documentary evidence fell short of 
corroborating her claims of financial responsibility.  
 
 Applicant claimed that she participated in financial counseling and is following a 
budget. However, her repayment efforts show that her financial problem is not being 
resolved and her finances are not under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable because she failed to show she had a reasonable basis to 
dispute her delinquent accounts. On the contrary, the evidence shows that during her 
2015-2016 interviews, Applicant stated many of the delinquent debts were her and her 
husband’s accounts, and promised to contact her creditors and pay them. Sometime 
later, she disputed the accounts, and they were removed from her credit report without 
her making payments on her accounts. Considering the evidence as a whole, 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 35, has been employed with the Government and federal contractors, 
and has held a clearance since 2008. Her evidence is insufficient to demonstrate 
financial responsibility and she failed to mitigate the financial considerations concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, and 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
