1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01500 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles Bell, Personal Representative 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected 
Information). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 14, 2016. On 
June 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
K.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on August 20, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 20, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for August 27, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) were revised effective June 8, 2017, and apply herein. 
02/06/2019
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and 
three witnesses testified, and Applicant Exhibit (AE) A was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old personnel security representative for a defense 
contractor, employed since 2008. She was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2006 and a 
master’s degree in 2012. She is married and has no children. She has held a security 
clearance since 2008. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant had four security infractions from 2008 to 2017. She 
admitted the allegations, with explanations. In 2008, while new to the company, Applicant 
inadvertently carried a camera in her handbag into a closed area where she worked. She 
sat at her desk, and was looking through her handbag when she discovered the camera. 
At the time, cameras, but not cell phones, were prohibited in the space. The camera 
remained off, and Applicant immediately showed the camera to her security manager. 
The company reported that no classified information was put at risk in the incident. 
 
In 2015, Applicant inadvertently scanned two program access requests (PAR) into 
a computer system. The PAR is unclassified but contains sensitive personal information. 
Applicant and another employee, both new to the position, were tasked to scan thousands 
of PARs as a group, into a computer system. The employees were not required to review 
each document for sensitive information, but a random check was done. After the PARs 
were entered into the computer system, Applicant noticed two PARs with sensitive 
information that should not have been scanned, and reported it to her security manager. 
Applicant’s supervisor, the company’s security manager, testified that the incident was 
not Applicant’s fault, rather, she completed the task as directed and could not have known 
the two particular PARs in the stack of PARs held sensitive information. The incident was 
reported and investigated as an infraction so that it could be properly documented, but no 
loss or compromise of sensitive information was found. 
 
In 2016, Applicant was again tasked to scan documents into a computer system, 
but to redact with a black marker, sensitive, unclassified data on some documents before 
scanning them. According to Applicant’s security manager, Applicant followed directions 
exactly as tasked, but noticed that some redacted documents still showed information 
through the redaction after scanning. Again, the security manager testified that Applicant 
was not at fault for the incident, but that she followed directions exactly as tasked, and 
Applicant reported the incident as soon as it was discovered. The company’s method of 
redaction was changed. Again, the incident was reported and investigated as an infraction 
so that it could be properly documented, but no loss or compromise of sensitive 
information was found. 
 
In 2017, Applicant allowed an unauthorized individual into a classified space. 
Applicant was tasked to provide a classified security briefing to new employees. She was 
provided a classified cover sheet from the government client, listing employees to be 
 
3 
 
briefed. The cover sheet identified all listed employees as cleared, but the underlying PAR 
for one of the employees was “disapproved” and should not have appeared on the cover 
sheet. Applicant reviewed the cover sheet, but did not realize that one employee listed 
was disapproved on his PAR. Applicant conducted the brief, but afterward she found that 
the cover sheet misidentified the employee as approved for the brief and reported the 
incident to her supervisor. The employee was eventually approved for the brief. The 
incident was referred to the on-site Air Force Office of Special Investigations (OSI) agent, 
who testified on behalf of Applicant. The OSI agent indicated that the government client 
misidentified the employee, and that the improper briefing was not the fault of Applicant. 
He has worked with Applicant on a regular basis and believes she is honest and 
trustworthy. He unequivocally recommends Applicant retain her security clearance.  
 
Applicant acknowledged the security incidents and took responsibility for all of the 
incidents, despite the fact that three of the four incidents were outside of her responsibility.  
The company compliance lead, Applicant’s current security manager, and on-site OSI 
agent testified on behalf of Applicant and attested that she was not directly responsible 
for the last three incidents and the camera incident was minor. They all believe that 
Applicant’s honesty and trustworthiness make her a unique fit for the security office and 
that she complies with security rules and regulations. Applicant promptly reported all 
infractions once discovered and learned how to prevent further incidents in the future. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K: Handling Protected Information 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the handling protected information security concern: 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Relevant conditions that could raise a security concern under AG ¶ 34 and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; and 
 
5 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 Applicant’s involvement in the security incidents alleged in the SOR are generally 
insufficient to directly implicate disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶ 34. However, 
even if Applicant’s record of involvement or relationship with security infractions raises 
concerns under AG ¶ 34, they are clearly mitigated under AG ¶ 35. 
 
Relevant conditions that could mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 35 include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 Except for a minor infraction in 2008 when Applicant inadvertently took an unused 
camera in her handbag into a closed facility, the more significant infractions were not 
caused by Applicant’s intentional actions or negligence. Applicant performed her duties 
as directed, but the direction and training were insufficient to prevent the security incidents 
from occurring. Applicant self-reported all of the incidents, learned to prevent them in the 
future, and is more attune to the potential pitfalls during similar tasks. Her compliance 
lead, security manager, and on-site OSI agent who works closely with Applicant strongly 
support her and attest to her trustworthiness and honesty. AG ¶¶ 35 (a), (b), (c), and (d) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
 
6 
 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guideline K in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature 
employee with many years of handling classified information in sensitive spaces, and she 
is trusted and honest. She has acknowledged the security lapses that led to the incidents 
in question, and understands how to prevent such occurrences going forward. The 
favorable record evidence is sufficient to fully mitigate the security concerns raised in the 
SOR. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information. Accordingly, I 
conclude Applicant has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security to grant continued 
eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s request for security eligibility 
is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
