1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01774 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. He failed to provide sufficient documentation to establish 
mitigation with respect to his consumer debts and failure to file Federal tax returns. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On June 25, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implemented June 8, 2017.  
02/05/2019
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on August 17, 2018, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) on September 12, 2018. Applicant received 
it on September 19, 2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.1 Applicant submitted no response to the FORM within the time period allotted. 
Items 1 through 7 are admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on January 
16, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, with clarifications. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and married. He earned an associate’s degree in 2002. 
He has worked for his employer, a government contractor, since September 2004. He 
served on active duty in the Army from 1984 to 2004. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to seven creditors for over $40,000 in delinquent debt as 
listed in the SOR. His consumer debts are established by credit reports dated October 
2017 and May 2018. He also failed to file his Federal income tax returns as required in 
2015 and 2016. His debt total includes approximately $4,000 owed to the IRS for the 2014 
and 2015 tax years.2 He also owes an unstated amount to the IRS for tax year 2016. His 
debts and delinquent tax filings are as follows. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant failed to pay his 2014 Federal income taxes. Applicant explained that he 
was audited by the IRS for tax year 2013 and that he was working with a tax consultant 
to correct the 2013 filing, prior to filing 2014. He filed his 2014 Federal tax return in August 
2017. His 2014 IRS tax transcript, dated August 13, 2018, shows that at that time he owed 
the IRS $2,213 for 2014. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant failed to file and pay his 2015 and 2016 Federal income taxes, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. Additionally SOR ¶ 1.d alleged Applicant was indebted to the IRS for tax 
year 2015 in the amount of $2,000. Applicant’s 2015 IRS tax transcript, dated August 13, 
2018, reflected that his 2015 Federal return was filed August 10, 2017. He owed $2,762 
for 2015 at that time. Applicant did not produce a tax transcript for the 2016 tax year. 
These is no evidence that he filed his Federal tax return for the 2016 tax year. (Item 2.) 
 
                                                          
1 DoD Directive ¶ E3.1.7 requires responses to be submitted 30 days from receipt of the Government’s 
FORM. The cover letter accompanying the case assignment indicated Applicant was given 45 days to 
submit a reply. He did not submit anything within either allotted time period. 
 
2 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed the IRS $6,000 for the 2014 tax year. However, a debt of $2,213 is 
reflected on the 2014 tax transcript. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant explained in his Answer that he pays the IRS $170 per month and will 
do so “until all taxes are paid in full.” (Item 2.) The IRS also garnishes “any refunds due 
[him] when [he] file[s] and put it towards overdue taxes.” (Item 2.) He provided a 
screenshot from his credit union account that documented one payment of $170 to the 
IRS in August 2018. His 2016 Federal tax returns appear to remain outstanding. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a judgment filed against him in November 2016 in the 
amount of $5,969, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant explained, “My wife took out credit 
cards in my name and I found out with a summons to court.” He claimed to have set up a 
payment plan with this creditor to resolve the debt through monthly payments of $170. He 
provided a screenshot from his credit union account that documented one payment of 
$170 and claimed it pertained to this debt. However, the creditor’s name is different on 
the statement. Without more information, I am unable to find that Applicant is resolving 
this debt. (Item 2; Item 7.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off credit card in the amount of $12,964, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt became delinquent in 2016. Applicant attributed this debt 
to his wife taking out another credit card in his name, unbeknownst to him. He claimed to 
have set up payment arrangements with this creditor to resolve the debt through monthly 
payments of $150. He provided a screenshot from his credit union account that 
documented one payment of $150 to a creditor of a different name. The evidence does 
not establish that this payment necessarily pertained to this debt. This debt remains 
unresolved. (Item 2; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $7,182, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt became delinquent in 2016. This was another credit card account 
opened without Applicant’s knowledge by his wife. Applicant indicated he intended to set 
up payments to resolve this debt, but produced nothing further in that regard. This debt 
is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a past-due account in the amount of $365, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt became delinquent in 2018. Applicant indicated that this debt is 
being garnished from his military retirement check. This debt is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 
6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $5,930, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt became delinquent in 2015. This was another credit card account 
opened without Applicant’s knowledge by his wife. Applicant indicated he intended to set 
up payments to resolve this debt, but produced nothing further in that regard. This debt 
is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $3,929, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.j. This debt became delinquent in 2016. This was another credit card account 
opened without Applicant’s knowledge by his wife. Applicant indicated he intended to set 
up payments to resolve this debt, but produced nothing further in that regard. This debt 
is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $542, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. This debt became delinquent in 2015. This was another credit card account 
opened without Applicant’s knowledge by his wife. Applicant indicated he intended to set 
up payments to resolve this debt, but produced nothing further in that regard. This debt 
is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s checking account screenshot dated August 13, 2018, reflected a 
balance of $3.06. He appears to have few funds available to address his delinquencies 
or maintain solvency. (Item 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under the financial considerations guideline is set out in AG 
& 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has over $40,000 in debt, which became delinquent between 2015 and 
2018. He failed to file his Federal income tax return for tax year 2016, and he filed returns 
for 2014 and 2015 late. He is indebted on delinquent Federal taxes from 2014 and 2015 
in an amount over $4,000. There is sufficient evidence to establish disqualification under 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has insufficient income to meet all of his financial obligations. There is 
no evidence that he will be able to avoid delinquent accounts in the future. He remains 
indebted on consumer accounts and has not provided evidence of filing his delinquent 
2016 tax return. His debt is ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to an IRS audit and to his wife opening 
credit cards without his knowledge. The IRS audit does not excuse Applicant from his 
duty to file and pay Federal income taxes. His wife’s actions can be considered 
circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to provide evidence that he 
addressed his delinquent consumer accounts in a reasonable and responsible manner 
once he learned of them. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation of financial counseling, but he did utilize the 
assistance of a tax preparation firm to provide him guidance during and after the tax audit. 
Even so, the record lacks evidence to suggest that his financial problems are under 
 
7 
 
 
control. While he has documented single payments to some of his creditors and has filed 
two of three delinquent tax returns, he lacks a track record of consistent payments on his 
consumer debts and to the IRS. The evidence does not establish full mitigation under AG 
¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d).  
 
 Applicant did not claim to dispute any of his alleged delinquencies. He admitted all 
of the allegations on the SOR. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to show that he resolved his delinquent 2016 Federal tax returns. 
Further, he documented only one $170 payment on over $4,000 of delinquent tax debt. 
There is no documentation of a payment agreement with the IRS to resolve his remaining 
Federal tax debt. AG ¶ 20(g) does not mitigate the security concern. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is credited with the 
payments reflected on his August 2018 bank statement, and his efforts to file his 
delinquent tax returns for 2014 and 2015. However, these efforts came after receiving the 
SOR and do not demonstrate a track record of responsible action. Further, he failed to 
meet his burden to show he has acted responsibly by filing his 2016 tax returns. He may 
be eligible for national security eligibility in the future if he is able to document reasonable 
and responsible actions toward resolving his outstanding Federal returns and maintain 
solvency. At this time, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
8 
 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
