1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02133 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On August 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 27, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on October 9, 2018, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a 
one-page response to the FORM dated October 24, 2018, and attachments including: a 
debt-management agreement with a credit-counseling company requiring a first 
payment of $205 in November 2018; income and expense information; and a university 
transcript. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 6, and the FORM 
response are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on January 17, 2019.  
02/14/2019
 
2 
 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. She obtained her bachelor’s degree in 2010 and she is 
currently enrolled online in a master’s program in criminal justice. She has been 
employed as a detective on the campus police force of a prominent college since May 
2015, and as a federal contractor since 2011. She reported no military service and she 
was divorced in 2011 after seven years of marriage. She has no children. Her former 
husband handled all of their finances. They were compelled to file for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in 2008 because Applicant suffered serious health problems. 
Applicant reported no previous security clearance. She answered all of the financial 
questions in section 26 (Financial Record) of her security clearance application (SCA) 
negatively, failing to disclose her delinquent student loans and medical debts.    
 
The SOR alleges the 2008 bankruptcy, five debts for overdue student loans, and 
eight delinquencies for medical debts. The delinquent debts alleged total $43,306 
including $38,989 for past-due student loans placed for collection. Applicant admitted all 
of the SOR allegations in her answer to the SOR on September 10, 2018, and she 
provided a one-page explanation. She explained that they were advised to file 
bankruptcy for their small business once Applicant became ill in 2007-2008. She was 
enrolled in a master’s program in September 2018 and stated her intention to contact 
the Department of Education about her financial aid and a repayment plan. She also 
claimed she committed funds to take care of her medical debts and she would start the 
process on September 10, 2018. No documentary evidence was provided to show her 
progress, if any.    
 
In her April 2018 personal subject interview (PSI) with a clearance investigator, 
Applicant stated that she thought she was entering into a one year contract with the 
fitness company creditor in SOR ¶ 1.o, but the employee signed her up for three years 
instead. (Item 5) Applicant stated her plan to contact this creditor to set up a payment 
plan and finish paying this debt off. No documentary evidence of follow-through was 
provided to show that she did this. With respect to her student loan debts at SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c., 1.d, 1.m, and 1.n, Applicant told the clearance investigator that they became 
delinquent because her former husband said he would take care of paying them. She 
claimed to be in the process of setting up a payment plan to resolve these debts, but 
provided no evidence of a track record or stream of payments on her student loans.    
 
Applicant has a health condition that requires her to travel to a specialized 
hospital for care. This has been a burden financially, and she is unable to make 
payments timely on a single income. (Item 5) Again, she stated her plan to set up a 
repayment plan for the resulting delinquent medical debts listed in the SOR. In late 
2018, Applicant entered into a debt-management agreement (attached to FORM 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 18, 2017 
security clearance application (SCA) (Item 3), or her personal security interview (PSI) on April 20, 2018. 
(Item 5)  
 
 
3 
 
 
response) but provided no evidence of actual payments pursuant to that plan. She also 
provided budget information and evidence of financial counseling in late 2018. Her loan 
rehabilitation, income and expense information shows her monthly income of $2,883 
compared to expenses of $2,110 in October 2018. (FORM Response) The delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR are all corroborated by her credit reports. (Items 4 and 6) She 
has no automobile loans or credit-card debts.  
 
Applicant grew up as a military dependent of a senior officer, and she has been a 
sworn police officer in Commonwealth A since 2010. She provided no character 
references or performance evaluations. Applicant attached a college transcript to her 
FORM response showing that she maintains a 3.8 grade point average in her master’s 
program. She produced evidence that she has taken the first step by entering into a 
debt-management plan to resolve her numerous student loans and medical debts, but 
she has provided no evidence of compliance or actual payments. It is unclear whether 
any of her SOR debts have been paid or disputed.  
 
                                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Administrative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines recognize the complexities of human behavior, and are applied 
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period 
and a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an 
affirmative determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s 2008 bankruptcy and the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are 
confirmed by her credit reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), (c), and 
19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2 Applicant has not met that burden.   
 
         The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant endured a divorce, and a life-threatening illness. These conditions were 
beyond her control. Yet, despite her knowledge almost a year ago that her 
delinquencies might affect her eligibility for a security clearance when she had her 
clearance interview, she has done very little to resolve these delinquent accounts. She 
also stated her intention to make payment arrangements during her clearance interview. 
She has produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with her answer to 
the SOR, or in response to the FORM, except for the debt management agreement and 
attendant documents. This was too little, too late. She has not demonstrated that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. These delinquent debts are longstanding 
from her college days, and continuing. She had previous financial distress when she 
filed for bankruptcy protection in 2008. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and that her debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. She admitted her delinquent 
medical debts and student loans and her credit reports confirm these debts. Applicant 
did not provide enough details with documentary corroboration about what she did to 
address her SOR debts. She did not provide documentation relating to any of the SOR 
debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the 
creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact;3 (3) credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was responsible 
for the debts and why she held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
her to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debt in the 
SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements of intent, there is 
no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, settled, compromised, or otherwise 
resolved the SOR debts. She did provide evidence of recent financial counseling and 
information about her budget. Yet, the record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documentation such as receipts or bank statements showing an actual stream of 
payments and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial problems and other 
mitigating information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
3 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or his] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has struggled to overcome a 
serious health condition and she served as a sworn law enforcement officer for almost 
nine years. She is continuing her education online and she made initial overtures toward 
resolving her financial problems. Most importantly, Applicant has not addressed the 
specific allegations in the SOR with concrete documentation. Instead, she has made 
hollow statements of her intent to repay her delinquent debts. She has not met her 
burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.o:               Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
