1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00967 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
 RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate financial responsibility, or that 
his financial problems are being resolved. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 25, 2017. 
After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 23, 2018, 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on May 11, 2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
DOHA assigned the case to another administrative judge in September 12, 2018, 
and reassigned it to me on November 29, 2018. The notice of hearing was issued on 
October 25, 2018, setting the hearing for November 29, 2018. At the hearing, the 
Government offered seven exhibits (GE 1 through 7). Applicant testified and submitted 
02/14/2019
 
2 
 
 
two exhibits post-hearing (AE 1 and 2). All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR 13 financial allegations (¶¶ 
1.a through 1.m). He submitted comments in mitigation and explanation noting that he 
had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a) and was anticipating the discharge of all 
remaining SOR debts (¶¶ 1.b through 1.m) in the near future, releasing him of any legal 
obligation to pay those debts. (Answer to SOR) His SOR admissions and those at his 
hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He graduated from high school in 2001, and has 
completed no additional formal education. He married in 2006, and has five children 
(two biological, one foster child, and two adopted) ages 16, 10, 3, and 2 (twins).  
 
Applicant has been working for federal contractors since 2007. He has performed 
the same work, but for several federal contractors depending on who held the contract. 
He was granted a secret clearance in 2008, which has been continued to present. 
Applicant was hired by his current employer and clearance sponsor in January 2017. He 
seeks the continuation of his clearance which is required for his work with his current 
employer.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2017 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed he was seeking assistance to resolve his financial problems, and alluded to 
attempts to refinance his home, a car, and a late mortgage payment. He noted that he 
had notified his facility security officer (FSO) of his financial problems. He also stated 
that he consulted an attorney in October 2017, with a view to filing Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, and was in the process of setting up a credit counseling class.  
 
In his SOR response, Applicant attributed his financial problems to the higher 
cost of medical insurance, out-of-pocket medical expenses, medical leave, reduced 
income due to being in disability, remodeling his home for his growing family, his 
inability to refinance his home, having to purchase a home water treatment system, and 
the reduction on his wife’s working hours, and ultimately her unemployment to take care 
of their children in October 2017. 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since 2007, with no periods of 
unemployment. However, he was out of work due to undergoing surgery and was 
placed on disability between April and October 2018. While in short-term disability (April 
through August 2018), his income was reduced by $1,000 per month, and while in long-
term disability (September through October 2018), his income was further reduced by 
an additional $300 per month.  
 
 
3 
 
 
At hearing, Applicant acknowledged that his financial problems were partially due 
to him making poor financial decisions. He noted that he went through periods where he 
used his credit cards to supplement his and his family’s income and to pay for their 
living expenses and yearly vacations. (Tr. 31, 92) He averred that other expenses were 
due to circumstances beyond his control. (Tr. 26) As examples, he noticed the cost of 
his daughter’s braces, totaling $5,000 that he incurred after his insurance denied 
payment in in 2017. He took a loan to pay for his daughter’s braces in August 2018. He 
also noted an unknown number of expensive fertility tests that his wife underwent to 
determine why they could not have more children in about 2012-2013. (Tr. 28) 
 
After the tests, Applicant and is wife decided to adopt, and they incurred 
additional expenses to get their home certified for the adoptions, including, a home 
water filtration system at a cost of over $5,500. He later defaulted on that account’s 
payments. The debt was included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and Applicant claimed 
he reaffirmed the debt after his bankruptcy discharge. (SOR ¶ 1.g) However, as of his 
hearing date, he had not set up a payment plan to pay this creditor. 
  
Concerning his yearly vacations, Applicant testified that his family have been 
taking “one big [vacation] once a year” during the last six years. They drive to Florida for 
a week to 10 days, and try to stay with family. (Tr. 93) Sometimes, Applicant would take 
leave without pay and use his credit cards to pay for his vacation expenses. At his 
hearing, he acknowledged that it was a poor decision to spend money you do not have. 
(Tr. 83) 
 
Applicant and his wife bought a small house in 2003 and lived in it until 2011. 
They rented a residence between June 2011 and April 2012. Sometime between 2010 
and 2011, Applicant took a $10,000 personal loan to consolidate his debts. (Tr. 54) That 
loan remained delinquent until it was discharged through bankruptcy in 2018. In 2013, 
Applicant took a $10,000 loan to purchase a car for his wife. In November 2017, 
Applicant voluntarily returned a car to the creditor because he no longer could afford the 
payments. The residual debt after the sale of the car was also discharged through 
bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant purchased their current home in 2012. He explained that up until then, 
all the furniture they had was second hand. When they bought their current home they 
bought new furniture (a lawn mower, tools, a generator, a snow blower, etc.) and 
acquired a significant debt. (Tr. 65-66) He took another personal loan to consolidate his 
debts. (Tr. 58) He claimed some of the debt was paid, but some carried on over time. 
(Tr. 32) 
 
In 2016, Applicant took a $50,000 personal loan to consolidate debts and use the 
remaining balance to finish his house basement. (Tr. 31, 36, SOR ¶ 1.g) He used part of 
the $50,000 loan to pay previous debt consolidation loans. (Tr. 56) His plan was to 
finish the house basement, anticipating based on his own research, that the house 
reappraisal would be at least $40,000 to $50,000 higher. He then would refinance the 
house for the higher value and take some of his equity money to pay off the $50,000 
 
4 
 
 
personal loan. However, Applicant’s mortgage payment became 30-days delinquent in 
October 2017, and he no longer qualified for the refinancing loan.  
 
Applicant’s income was insufficient to pay for his living expenses and 
accumulated debts. He had maxed out his credit cards and was unable to pay them. In 
about October 2017, he consulted with a bankruptcy attorney, and scheduled his credit 
counseling classes. He notified his facility security officer of his financial problems in 
December 2017. He filed his Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2018, and was discharged 
of his dischargeable debts in July 2018. (GE 7) Concerning his current financial 
situation, Applicant testified he is making $82,000 yearly. His monthly take-home pay is 
about $3,000.  
 
Applicant testified that he reaffirmed his mortgage debt and has been making his 
mortgage payments. He submitted a checking account statement showing he paid 
$1,969 in February, March and April 2018; made two payments of $1,969 in May 2018; 
made payments in June and July 2018; skipped the August 2018 payment; made a 
payment in September 2018, and made two payments in October 2018. Applicant also 
testified that he reaffirmed his car loan after the bankruptcy. He presented a receipt 
from November 2018, showing he paid $260 to a credit union, and that the next 
payment would be due in December 2018. (AE 1)  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. He claimed to recognize 
the many financial mistakes he made, although he does not regret some of the 
expenses incurred such as buying the new home, the new furniture, and the fertility 
medical testing. He testified that he and his wife no longer use credit cards, and only 
purchase necessities with cash. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The AGs list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. He had financial 
problems before 2012, and took a loan to consolidate his debts. In 2012, he purchased 
a home above his financial means and incurred an extensive debt furnishing the house. 
He took another loan to buy a car in 2013. Applicant then took a $50,000 loan in 2016, 
seeking to pay his delinquent loans, consolidate his debts, and finish his home 
basement. He speculated that the anticipated higher value of the house with a finished 
basement would allow him to refinance the house at a higher price. He would then use 
some of his refinancing money to pay his prior $50,000 loan. However, his mortgage 
became delinquent for 30 days and he was disqualified from refinancing the house. 
 
Applicant’s income was insufficient to pay for his living expenses and 
accumulated debts. He maxed out his credit cards paying for his living expenses and 
other discretionary expenses. He was unable to pay his debts and they became 
delinquent. He notified his facility security officer of his financial problems in December 
2017, and he filed his Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2018. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” The record established these disqualifying conditions, 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.1  
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
 
7 
 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained an applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Notwithstanding his 
recent bankruptcy discharge, Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing.  
 
 Applicant reaffirmed three loans following his bankruptcy discharge. He 
presented evidence that he established a payment agreement with the mortgage 
creditor and has been making monthly payments. His receipt for one payment to a 
credit union is insufficient for me to conclude that Applicant has been making recurrent 
payments on his car loan. He presented no evidence to show that he established a 
payment agreement with the third loan creditor, or that he has been making recurrent 
payments on that loan. Moreover, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of good-
faith efforts to pay his debts before his bankruptcy filing, or that he was financially 
responsible under his circumstances.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because his medical problems, reduced earnings 
while in disability, and expenses associated with his daughter’s braces, may be 
considered circumstances beyond his control. Notwithstanding, his evidence is 
insufficient to show that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. On the 
contrary, the evidence shows that Applicant has been living beyond his means, 
supplementing his income with his credit cards, taking recurrent personal loans to pay 
his credit debts, and ultimately reneging on his financial obligations. 
  
                                                                                                                                            
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant received counseling as a result of his bankruptcy filing. However, his 
evidence is insufficient to show clear indications that his financial problems are resolved 
or under control. Applicant presented no evidence of contacts with creditors, payments 
made, or of good-faith efforts to repay his creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate 
financial responsibility, or that his financial problems are being resolved. The financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant, 35, has been employed with federal contractors and has held a 
clearance since around 2007-2008. His evidence is insufficient to establish a track 
record of financial responsibility. It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding 
an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against 
granting a security clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations security concerns 
lead me to conclude that granting a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at 
this time.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his delinquent debts, a 
healthy financial picture, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, 
he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:     Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
