 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01661 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 4, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On November 8, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  (Government Exhibit 1.) On July 6, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 5, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on October 22, 
2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 27, 2018.  The 
 
2 
 
Government offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered a set of documents, 
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibit A collectively, which was admitted without objection.  
Applicant testified on her own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business 
on December 3, 2018, to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting 
documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as 
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old and is divorced.  She has a high school diploma and an 
Associates of Arts degree.  She is employed by a defense contractor is as an IT 
Specialist.  She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified eleven delinquent debts totaling in excess of approximately 
$75,000, which include student loans, credit card debt, and medical bills, among other 
miscellaneous debt.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit reports of the Applicant dated November 19, 2016; 
and May 10, 2018, confirm the debts listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 2 and 3.)  
Applicant began working for her current employer in October 2018 and she earns 
$52,000 annually.  Before that she worked for another company, temp agencies, and 
had other miscellaneous job and earned substantially less.   
 
Applicant testified that she began to have financial problems after she was fired 
in 2014 by her employer.  She explained that she did not get along with the director, 
who thought she could not do her job.  At that time, Applicant was completely out of 
work for about ten months.  During that period, she collected unemployment and went 
through a training program to become certified for Information Technology (IT).  She 
was also working for a temp agency, but was still not earning enough to pay her bills.   
 
In May 2018, while working for another employer, Applicant encountered a freak 
accident.  While working as an IT Specialist, she grabbed a flat screen monitor that was 
sitting on the desk, and tried to lift it up.  The power plug was jammed behind the desk, 
and Applicant twisted her knee, tore the cartilage, and was unable to walk.  Applicant 
was off work completely for three or four months.  During that period, she received 
workers compensation which was only 40 percent of her pay.  While she was off work, 
trying to heal from the knee injury, she fell on her hand and broke her finger.  As a result 
 
3 
 
of these accidents, she is no longer able to lift more than 25 pounds and cannot bend, 
twist, squat, or kneel repetitively. 
 
  Applicant believes that her long periods of unemployment and freak accidents 
caused her to be off work for a total of two and a half years, namely periods in 2014, 
2015, and part of 2017.  During this period of unemployment, she experienced financial 
hardship, and borrowed money from her mother, just to make ends meet, but was still 
unable to pay her delinquent bills.   
 
In October 2018, Applicant was hired by her current employer, and since then 
she has earned a decent income.  When she started working for her current employer, 
she still had personal debts she paid first that involved money that she borrowed from 
family.  Once she paid those debts off, she started working to resolve the debt set forth 
in the SOR.  Applicant also recently reduced her living expenses by moving out of her 
apartment and into a house where she is renting a room.  The following delinquent 
debts set forth in the SOR are discussed below:         
    
1.a.  A delinquent student loan debt was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $65,441.  Applicant stated that she has consolidated her student loans and 
set up a payment plan to resolve her student loan debt.  In November 2018, she started 
making payments to resolve the debt in the amount of $200 every two weeks.  (Tr. pp. 
18 - 19.)  At the time of the hearing, she had made one payment. 
 
1.b.  A delinquent credit card debt was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$3,479.  Applicant stated that she has tried to contact that creditor but has not been 
able to set up a payment arrangement yet.  She plans to do so soon.  (Tr. p. 32.)          
 
1.c.  A delinquent debt was charged off in the approximate amount of $3,186.  Applicant 
testified that she set up a payment plan with the creditor in November 2018, to pay $50 
every two weeks toward the debt.  At the time of the hearing, she had made two 
payments.  (Tr. p. 19 – 20.)           
 
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$1,169.  Applicant claims that her niece opened the account in her name.  When 
Applicant confronted her, she blamed it on her friend.  Her niece is incarcerated.  (Tr. 
pp. 33 – 34.)          
 
1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$679.   Applicant contends that this is the same debt that is set forth in SOR allegation 
1.j.  Applicant stated that she set up a payment plan with the creditor of $50 monthly to 
resolve the debt.  Her first payment was on November 15, 2018.  (Tr. p. 21.)      
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical debt is listed on Applicant’s credit report in the amount of 
approximately $152.  Applicant stated that she set up a payment arrangement with the 
creditor to pay off the entire amount on the 30th of November 2018.  (Tr. p. 38.)   
     
 
4 
 
1.g.  A delinquent cellular debt was charged off in the approximate amount of $33.  
Applicant stated that this debt is scheduled to be paid in full on the 30th of November 
2018.  (Tr. p. 40.) 
            
1.h.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$198.  Applicant stated that this debt is scheduled to be paid in full on the 30th of 
November 2018.  (Tr. p. 39.)            
 
1.i.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$198.  Applicant stated that this debt is scheduled to be paid in full on the 30th of 
November 2018.  (Tr. p. 39.)     
 
1.j.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $679.  Applicant contends that this is the same debt set forth in the SOR 
allegation 1.e.  Applicant set up a payment plan in November 2018 with the creditor to 
pay $50 monthly toward the debt.  At the time of the hearing, she had made one 
payment and on the 30th of November 2018, she was scheduled to pay another.  (Tr. p. 
21.)        
  
1.k.  A delinquent cellular debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$2,066.  Applicant stated that she started making payments of $200 every two weeks 
which started on November 16, 2018.  (Tr. p. 40.)            
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 
6 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was fired from her job in 2014 and began to have financial problems.  
Unable to find steady employment, as time passed, her delinquent debts increased.  
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
   
  Arguably, Applicant’s financial problems began when she was fired from her job.  
They continued when she was unable to find steady employment, and then aggravated 
by her freak accident this past year that caused her to miss even more work.  In regard 
to Applicant’s delinquent debts, at this point, most of them remain owing.  Given her 
situation, she has not been able to pay much toward her delinquent debts, since she 
only recently started working again.  She has now been working for about three months 
straight and during that time she has demonstrated sound judgment and has made a 
diligent effort to resolve her debts.  However, it is not clear from the record whether she 
is only paying them in order to obtain a security clearance, or whether she would pay 
them regardless of the situation.  In either case, Applicant remains excessively 
indebted, and has not established a systematic pattern of payment demonstrating that 
she can and will resolve her delinquent debts.  Based upon these facts, there is 
insufficient evidence in the record to show that she has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  There remain questions about her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
