1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01514 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 12, 2017. On August 
22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F 
and Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented 
by the DOD on June 7, 2018. 
Applicant timely  answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on October 31, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on 
02/28/2019
2 
 
November 15, 2018. The Government’s evidence, included in the FORM  and identified 
as Items 1 through 9, is admitted without objection. Applicant provided a response to the 
FORM, which was marked as AE A and entered into the record without objection.  The 
case was assigned to me on February 14, 2019. Based on my review of the documentary 
evidence, I find that Applicant has not mitigated the financial or personal conduct 
concerns. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old program manager-engineer for a federal contractor. He 
is married and has two children. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps Active  Reserve from 
1997 to 2005 when he was honorabley discharged. (Item 4) He obtained an 
undergraduate degree in 2002, and a master’s degree in 2007. He has held a security 
clearance since 2007. He has been employed with his current employer since April 2017. 
(Item 4) 
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges in 1.a-1.aa, a 2012 state  tax lien in the amount of $2,087;  four 
student loans in collection; collection accounts; charged off accounts; and car 
repossessions for a total of 27 delinquent debts totaling approximately $230,936. (Item 
1) Applicant admitted the financial allegations listed on the SOR and provided 
explanations. He claims that some accounts are duplicates and that he has  some debts 
that were judgments. (Item 3) Applicant believes that his delinquent debt is about 
$173,609.43 and that the majority of the debt consists of student loans. 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to unemployment, job instability and 
garnishment of some of his wages for a rental car charge of about $8,000 that was 
charged to his corporate credit card in 2016, and his lack of payments. He was 
unemployed from  June 2009 to August 2010 due to a contract ending. (Response to 
FORM) He was also unemployed from February to April 2017. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owes the state tax lien in SOR 1.a, and that he will be 
establishing a payment plan with the state to resolve the issue. (AE A) 
 
 As to SOR allegations for student loans 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.aa, Applicant states 
that he has consolidated the student debt in the amount of $180,000 into $118 433, and 
that he has started making payments on the loans. He submitted a May 2018 letter stating 
that  he was enrolling in a rehabilitation program for the student loans, but he did not 
submit any documentation that he has started the program by making any payments. It 
appears from the record that a garnishment of $5,300.82 was deducted from his 2018 
paycheck. 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 4) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 As to 1.d, 1. e, and 1.m,  all car loans, Applicant states that they have been paid 
in judgments in 2014. There is no information that any judgments have been released. It 
does appear in a credit report that he submitted that the allegation in 1.d was  settled for 
less than the full balance. (AE A) 
 
 As to 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k ,1.l, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r ,1.s, 1.v, 1.y, and 1.z, Applicant 
responded to the FORM by stating that he will be setting up a payment plan soon. These 
accounts are on the credit reports and Applicant did not submit any evidence of  payments 
made or payment agreements. (Answer to FORM) 
 
 As to 1.e, 1.j, 1.m,  and 1.t, Applicant claims that they have been resolved as they 
are no longer on his credit reports. However, the remaining SOR alleged debts appear 
on the 2017 credit report submitted by Applicant as charged-off accounts or collection 
accounts. It does not reflect that any were actually paid. 
 
 Some of the debts appear to be duplicates as Applicant explains. SOR allegation 
1.x appears to be a duplicate of 1.t; 1.w is the same as 1.o; 1.y is the same as 1.v. 
Applicant does not state that they are paid. They are either not on the credit report or he 
will set up a payment plan. He wanted to emphasize that the total amount he allegedly 
owes is less than what the SOR states. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges under Personal Conduct 2.a through 2.h, an arrest in 2015 and 
a charge of theft of a motor vehicle, a felony; termination of employment in 2017 for 
misuse of a company credit card and ineligibility for rehire; unauthorized use of another 
company’s credit card for personal expenses of in the amount of $8,000 that Applicant 
did not reimburse; five falsifications on his 2017 security clearance application including 
not reporting termination of employment (section 13 A and C); not listing the wronglful 
use of a company credit card (Section 26); and  finally not listing an arrest. (Item1) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2015, and charged with theft of a motor vehicle. 
However, he was renting a car and presented documentation that he was released 
unconditionally from jail the following day. He did not report any details about the situation. 
 
 Applicant denied that he was fired in 2017. He stated that he voluntarily left the 
job. He plans to repay the $8,000 charged on his corporate credit card. Applicant claims 
he lost his comnpany  card and that a hotel charged an expense on that card  instead of 
his personal card. 
 
 Applicant denied the five falsifications as described above. He stated that none of 
the actions were done purposely and that he stands ready to take responsibility for them. 
He did not articulate a credible reason why he did not list the incidents on his 2017 security 
clearance application. 
 
 
4 
 
     Policies 
 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, and failure to pay a 
state  tax lien, and education loans that are not in repayment, along with numerous 
collection accounts that became delinquent, establish three disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”); and 19(f) (”failure to  pay annual Federal,  state, or local income 
tax  as required.” 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
6 
 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20 (g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has a 2012 state tax lien, numerous collection accounts, vehicle 
repossessions, defaulted student loans, judgments, and wage garnishments. He stated 
that he has made some payments and is in the process of establishing payment plans. 
He stated that judgments were paid in 2014. He provided no documentation that a student 
loan rehabilitation plan has actually started or that he has started other promised payment 
plans. A few accounts appear to be duplicates. Applicant did not provide evidence of any 
payments other than the garnishments from the record. It it is not clear how long his pay 
had been garnished and for which accounts. He was unemployed for a short time but he 
was also terminated for wrongful behavior. He admitted that he owes the debts and 
promises to pay and set up plans. However, he provided no documentation to confirm his 
assertions. There is no information in the record as to his current salary. It is impossible 
to know if he is financially stable. Applicant has furnished insufficient information to meet 
his burden. There is no record of financial counseling. None of the mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected 
information; (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate 
behavior; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
(4)evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources;  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; …; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
8 
 
Applicant has not provided a credible explanation as to why he was arrested 
for car theft. He admitted that he put personal expenses on a company 
credit card and gave no real reason for the actions. He denied that he was 
fired but rather left the company. However, he admitted to the $8,000 
unauthorized charges on the corporate credit card. He denied the 
falsifications on his security clearance application. He noted that this was 
not purposeful. He failed to report an arrest or his credit card misuse on his 
security clearance application. He knew these actions occurred recently. He 
deliberately did not report them. Therefore, AG 16(a), (c) and (d) apply. 
 
17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant intentionally, knowingly, and willfully misreported information on 
his 2017 security clearance application in three separate sections. He misused a 
9 
 
company credit card and has an unexplainable arrest from 2015.  It is not the result of a 
one-time mistake or an isolated incident. Although he admitted to the wrongdoing, he 
explained that he will make amends and pay what he owes. Applicant’s actions reveal 
untrustworthy or unreliable behavior and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. He has not met his burden to mitigate the personal conduct concern. None 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
     Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance since 2007. Her served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps receiving an honorable discharge. He has worked for a number of years as a 
contractor. He is married and has two children.   
 
 The record does not provide sufficient information as to why Applicant accrued so 
many debts. He was unemployed for a short time. He was also terminated for wrongdoing. 
He wants to pay his debts and promises to set up plans. He has not done anything to 
resolve his state tax lien. He has not received financial counseling. There is no evidence 
of payments or payment plans other than garnishment. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance application in five sections. 
He misused a company credit card. He has not has mitigated the financial or personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
.     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.aa    Against Applicant:   
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:    Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
