1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01044 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 4, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on June 11, 
2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 16, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for December 13, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled, but was continued and reconvened on January 24, 2019. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) of the first hearing on January 2, 2019, and the second hearing (Tr. 
2) on February 5, 2019.
02/08/2019
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend the SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding an allegation identified 
as SOR ¶ 1.d, as follows: 
 
1.d. You failed to timely file your state and federal income tax returns for 
tax year 2017. 
 
The motion was granted over Applicant’s objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer, or a predecessor contractor, since April 2015. He attended college 
for several years, but he has not earned a degree. He is single with one child. He has 
custody of his child, and they live at his parents’ house.1 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment before 2015. The 
amended SOR alleges two delinquent student loans in the amounts of $36,479 (SOR ¶ 
1.a) and $26,204 (SOR ¶ 1.b), an unpaid judgment to a credit card provider for $5,335 
(SOR ¶ 1.c), and Applicant’s failure to file state and federal income tax returns when 
they were due for 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.d). However, the two student loans are duplicate 
accounts.2 
 
 Applicant stated that the judgment was paid in early 2017 through garnishment of 
his wages. He provided documentation that the judgment was paid and satisfied at 
some point before March 2018. Since May 2018, his pay has been garnished $451 
twice a month for his student loan. He paid a total of $7,667 during that period, and he 
reduced the balance from $36,479 to $30,920.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29, 41-44, 59; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 29-30, 33-34, 43-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4.  
 
3 Tr. at 30-31, 43, 49-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE B, C.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant filed his 2017 state and federal income tax returns in January 2019. He 
is due a $1,709 refund from the IRS, and he owes his state $3, which he assures he will 
pay.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was negligent when he failed to file his tax returns on 
time. He paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR before the SOR was issued. He 
stated that his current finances are sound, which is corroborated by the most recent 
credit report in evidence. He has a good job that enables him to provide for his child. 
The garnishment of his student loans was recently lifted. He credibly testified that he will 
continue to pay his student loans, file his tax returns on time, and maintain his financial 
stability. He has not received formal financial counseling.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2016. He did not report any financial issues on the questionnaire, but he 
reported derogatory information under other questions. He credibly denied intentionally 
providing false information on the questionnaire. He stated that he had already made 
arrangements to pay the debt that resulted in the judgment. The August 2016 credit 
report listed the student loan as in deferment.6 I find that he did not intentionally provide 
false information of the SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified In6ormation within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 34; Tr. 2 at 6; AE A.  
 
5 Tr. at 33-37, 42, 47-48, 51-56; Tr. 2 at 6-9.  
 
6 Tr. at 37-38, 56-58.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including an unpaid judgment, a 
defaulted student loan, and income tax returns not filed on time. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are duplicate student loans. When the same conduct is 
alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005). SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment before 2015. The 
judgment has been paid; the student loan is being paid; and the 2017 income tax 
returns have been filed. Applicant receives less credit in mitigation because the 
judgment and student loan payments were made by garnishment. However, he also 
paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR before the SOR was issued. His statement 
that his current finances are sound was corroborated by the most recent credit report in 
evidence. The garnishment of his student loans was recently lifted. He credibly testified 
that he will continue to pay his student loans, file his tax returns on time, and maintain 
his financial stability. He has a good job that enables him to provide for his child. He 
 
6 
 
knows that a security clearance is crucial to keeping that job, and financial stability is 
required for him to keep his security clearance. Security concerns about Applicant’s 
finances are mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information about his finances on his 
2016 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
 
7 
 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
