1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00149 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 23, 2016. 
On February 9, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 5, 2018, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
October 19, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
02/14/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for January 24, 2019. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 - 2 were admitted into evidence without objection. At 
the hearing, Applicant testified, and he submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – G, which 
were admitted without objection. I left the record open until February 8, 2019, for 
Applicant to submit supplemental documentation. Applicant timely submitted post-
hearing documentation including an e-mail dated February 7, 2019, and 15 pages of 
documentation showing the conveyances of two properties in Turkey that were owned 
by Applicant and his wife. These were collectively marked as AE H and admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 5, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Turkey 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Turkey. The request listed supporting documents to show 
detail and context for those facts. A risk assessment in this case necessitates 
administrative notice of facts concerning Turkey.  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE 1 source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The 
facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts from HE 1: 
 
Notwithstanding the long strategic U.S. – Turkey relationship, current country 
conditions are problematic.  The U.S. State Department urges citizens to avoid travel to 
Turkey due to terrorism and arbitrary detentions. Terrorist groups explicitly target 
Western tourists and expatriates for kidnapping and assassination. The potential for 
terrorist attacks in Turkey, including against U.S. citizens and interests, remains high. 
The U.S. Government does not allow family members to accompany personnel 
assigned to the U.S. Consulate in Adana, unless they are working in the Consulate. 
Turkey is a transit country for foreign terrorist fighters wishing to join the Islamic State of 
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other terrorist groups fighting in Syria and Iraq. Since a July 
2016 coup attempt, the Turkish Government has operated under a state of emergency, 
with far reaching effects on the country’s society and institutions, restricting the exercise 
of many fundamental freedoms. Profound and significant human rights abuses persist.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and married. He reports no children. He was born in 
Bulgaria and moved to Turkey at age seven. He came to the United States (U.S.) in 
1996 to further his education because Turkey plummeted into chaos. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011. He earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated August 23, 2016 (GE 1) and the summary of personal subject interview 
conducted on September 25, 2017. (GE 2) 
 
 
3 
 
before emigrating from Turkey. He obtained his Ph.D. in the U.S. in 2000. (GE 1, Tr. 12) 
He has been employed as a senior engineer by a U.S. corporation since 2000 and he 
has recently applied for another position with a federal contractor, which approval is 
contingent on Applicant obtaining a security clearance. (Tr. 60) Applicant provided 
documents listing his professional accomplishments, including numerous certificates 
and awards, and 12 U.S. patents in his field of micro-electrical mechanical systems. He 
also listed his academic accomplishments. (AE A, B, C)  
 
 Applicant testified that he or his wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen, owned three real 
estate parcels in Turkey before he became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 15, 47) His wife 
purchased an apartment in Turkey in 2006 before they were married. She is the sole 
owner. (AE H) He purchased a second property in Turkey in 2008. (Tr. 49) Applicant’s 
wife purchased a third apartment for her totally disabled mother to live close to her 
relatives in 2012, the year of their marriage. (AE D, Tr. 50) The three real-estate 
holdings alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d have lost 50–60% in value compared to when they were 
purchased, due to the tumultuous conditions in Turkey. (Tr. 15-16) Applicant provided a 
graph that visually depicts the details of their purchases of real estate in Turkey. (AE D) 
Applicant testified credibly that the exchange rate for Turkish currency (lira) was 
relatively flat for a long time, but then it lost half of its value on world markets in a five- 
year span from 2012 to 2017. (Tr. 48) 
 
 Applicant testified that the property, which he purchased in Turkey in 2008, 
actually was not completely built until 2013, due to chaos in that country. (Tr. 74) 
Therefore, it could not be sold previously. Applicant’s wife became a U.S. citizen in June 
2017. She was a market researcher in Turkey previously and she had no affiliation with 
the Turkish government. Her mother also has a green card as a permanent resident in 
the U.S. since 2017. (Tr. 76) Applicant testified credibly that it was extremely difficult to 
sell the real estate in Turkey due to instability, its loss in value, and a saturated market 
from overdevelopment around Istanbul. (Tr. 50-51, AE D) He provided supplemental 
post-hearing documents including a deed showing that the real estate he purchased in 
2008 has now been donated or conveyed to his sister under Turkish law. Applicant’s 
wife provided a power of attorney (POA) dated January 28, 2019, to effectuate the sale 
of property purchased for his mother-in-law. (AE H) Applicant’s former Turkish real 
estate interests had a total value of $337,000. (Tr. 58)  
 
 Applicant has telephonic contact with his parents once or twice a week. (Tr. 63) 
Applicant contacts his sister living in Turkey only in crisis. (Tr. 66) He had a falling out 
with his sister because she is angry that Applicant lives so far away, and the care of 
their infirm parents falls to her. (Tr. 67-69) Applicant’s 80-year-old father had brain 
surgery in 2016 and he has not recovered well. (Tr. 30) Applicant testified that the last 
crisis was when his father fell down and lacerated his scalp and Applicant flew to Turkey 
in September 2018 to assist. (Tr. 69) His father is prone to falling and often injures 
himself. Applicant has visited Turkey about once a year for the last ten years. (Tr. 69-
70) Applicant’s 76-year-old mother had a heart attack and subsequent bypass surgery, 
also in 2012. (Tr. 32) His parents never had any affiliation or employment with the 
Turkish government of intelligence agencies. (Tr. 42) Applicant never sent them 
financial aid.   
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant owns real estate and other assets in the U.S. as well. He purchased a 
home in September 2014, for $533,000. His mortgage on that property is down from 
$276,000 to $248,000. (Tr. 56, AE D) Applicant has more than 50% equity in that 
property. He also has a $287,000 retirement account; $262,000 savings account in U.S. 
banks; and approximately $100,000 in publicly traded stocks and bonds. Applicant’s 
U.S. assets, excluding real estate, total over $650,000. (Tr. 61) He has no intent to 
return to Turkey, unless it is to visit and help care for his parents in crisis. (Tr. 76, 93) 
Applicant communicates via telephone only with his parents in Turkey, and nobody else. 
(Tr. 81) Applicant testified credibly that the plan is for his parents to leave everything to 
his sister, when they pass, as she has primarily cared for them. (Tr. 88)  
    
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
Applicant’s parents are living in Turkey, but they are in desperately poor health. 
He regularly communicates with them by phone as a dutiful son. His sister is a citizen 
 
6 
 
and resident of Turkey. He has extremely limited contact with her. He regularly 
communicates with no one else in Turkey. He provides occasional care and comfort to 
his parents during crises. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) are implicated by the evidence. Applicant divested himself of his real estate in 
Turkey. AG ¶ 7(f) is no longer a security concern.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and   
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working and living in 
the U.S. since 1996. He earned a doctorate degree from a U.S. institution and he has 
been a valuable member of the corporate workforce since 2000. He needs a security 
clearance to enable him to work for a federal contractor in direct support of DOD efforts 
globally. The value of his U.S. assets eclipses the value of his former real estate 
holdings in Turkey, which he has now transferred to his sister. Although he is presumed 
to have strong bonds of affection with his parents and sibling in Turkey, these bonds are 
not sufficient to offset or overcome his demonstrated, long-term commitment to the U.S. 
Applicant has effectively rebutted the presumption under all of the circumstances.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
 
7 
 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.2  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant’s parents and sister are Turkish citizens residing in Turkey, which is an 
unstable regime. His contact with them is limited, as needed, by telephone, and annual 
visits. There is no indication that they were ever affiliated with the Turkish government 
or intelligence services. Applicant’s foreign family members do not pose an 
unacceptable security risk. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant would 
report contacts with his relatives by foreign intelligence agents, and that he has a long-
term commitment and exclusive loyalty to the U.S. All of the mitigating conditions in AG 
¶ 8 are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline. Applicant is 48 years old. He is married to a U.S. 
citizen, educated in the U.S., and owns property here. Virtually all of his adult work life 
was spent in supporting U.S. interests. He is committed to his profession and life in the 
U.S. His foreign contacts are minimal and he no longer has foreign real estate. He has 
no conflict of interest.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant  
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                      Paragraph 1, Guideline B:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:                             For Applicant 
 
                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
          ________________________ 
          Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
