1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED]1 )       ISCR Case No. 18-01533 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Laurence P. Nokes, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s response to the Government’s information mitigated the security 
concerns about his finances. Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On November 7, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified 
information as part of his employment with a federal contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly 
1 Applicant’s name is misspelled on the Statement of Reasons. 
02/06/2019
 
2 
 
consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified 
information.2 
 
On June 8, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without 
a hearing.  
 
On September 5, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2018. The record closed on November 
9, 2018, after Applicant timely responded to the FORM (Response). I received this case 
for decision on January 30, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes the federal 
government $58,490, a debt that is being enforced through a tax lien filed against him in 
2007 (SOR 1.a). In response to the SOR, Applicant denied that he was subject to a federal 
tax lien.4 (FORM, Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. After graduating from college in June 2002, he was hired 
in October 2002 as an engineer by a federal contractor. He still works for that company, 
and he first received a security clearance in August 2006. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 In July 2000, Applicant bought a house. In May 2012, he gifted an interest in that 
house to his parents. All three persons have since owned that property in joint tenancy. 
(FORM, Item 1; Response) 
 
 In September 2003, the IRS filed a lien against Applicant’s parents to enforce a 
$58,462.25 debt for unpaid taxes between 1997 and 1999. The lien was released in 
October 2012. (FORM, Items 1, 4, and 5) 
 
 A credit report obtained by investigators in February 2017 shows a tax lien filed in 
May 2007 that is attributed only to Applicant. A tax record obtained in August 2018 shows 
a tax lien filed in May 2007 that is attributed to both Applicant and his parents. Both 
records show a lien for an amount that is $27.75 more than the 2003 lien against 
Applicant’s parents. The lien also carries a different filing number from the satisfied tax 
lien against Applicant’s parents. (FORM, Items 4 and 5) 
 
                                                 
2 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 5). 
4 His denial renders SOR 1.a as a controverted issue of fact and requires the Government to produce 
sufficient reliable information to support the allegation. See Directive, Section E3.1.14. 
 
 
3 
 
 On October 10, 2018, the attorney for Applicant’s parents5 wrote to the IRS to 
contest both the lien and its entry on Applicant’s credit history. In that letter, he averred 
that in 2003, when the lien was obtained against Applicant’s parents, they did not have 
any assets to which the lien could attach. He further opined that Applicant’s name was 
included in the lien in June 2012 after he and his parents became joint owners of the 
house he gifted to them. Because Applicant’s name was also on the title as a joint tenant 
at that time, Applicant also became a subject of the lien. (Response) 
 
 At some point before receiving an interest in Applicant’s house, his parents had 
arranged with the IRS to repay their tax debt. As part of that agreement, the IRS advised 
them the lien would be renewed periodically to protect the IRS’ interest until the lien was 
satisfied. Applicant’s counsel argues that the May 2007 filing date represented only a 
renewal of the 2003 lien by the IRS against Applicant’s parents, and that it was not the 
date Applicant’s name was added to the lien. Further, a renewal four years after the lien 
was first filed might explain the different filing number and slightly different amount of debt 
that was the subject of the lien. Accordingly, Applicant’s position is that in June 2012, 
when he gifted an interest in his house to his parents while the lien was still active, the 
IRS attached the lien to the house and its owners, and that there is only one lien at issue 
here. As of November 9, 2018, the IRS had not responded to Applicant’s attorney’s 
October 10, 2018 letter. (FORM, Items 3 – 5; Response) 
 
 Applicant’s explanation of this matter is plausible. The record does not contain any 
information that clearly establishes the presence of another tax lien against Applicant that 
is still unresolved. The differences between the details of the release of lien order provided 
by Applicant and the information about the lien presented in the FORM are minor. Without 
additional information showing how Applicant incurred his own tax debt, those differences 
are inconsequential. Based on all of the foregoing, I find as fact that the only tax lien at 
issue in this case was the lien originally filed against Applicant’s parents in 2003 and 
resolved in 2012. Further, the tax lien filed in May 2007 was the same lien and was 
attributed to Applicant only through operation of the joint home ownership with his 
parents, and not because of any failure by Applicant to file or pay his taxes.  
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                 
5 Their attorney is also representing Applicant in this matter. 
6 See Directive, 6.3. 
 
4 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The DOD CAF’s information provided a good-faith basis for the allegation that 
Applicant owed $58,490 for a federal tax lien filed in 2007. Such information reasonably 
raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
                                                 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Information presented in support of the SOR requires consideration of the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required). If uncontroverted, the Government’s information would show that 
Applicant failed to pay federal income, property, or business taxes sometime before 2007, 
and that as of June 2018, he had not paid or otherwise resolved a tax debt being enforced 
through a federal tax lien. 
 
Applicant denied the single allegation in this case, thus keeping the burden on the 
Government to produce sufficient information to prove the facts alleged. Applicant also 
proffered a copy of his parents’ release of the 2003 tax lien. The Government’s exhibits 
reflected both a lien attributed only to Applicant and a lien attributed to Applicant and his 
parents. All of the available information probative of Applicant’s responsibility for unpaid 
taxes shows that the lien at issue in SOR 1.a, while it included Applicant’s name, was not 
the result of any failure by Applicant to file or pay taxes.  
 
Department Counsel argued in the FORM that the information Applicant provided 
with his SOR response did not meet his burden of refuting or mitigating the security 
concerns raised by the Government’s information. Nonetheless, in response to the 
FORM, Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that the lien in question 
was his parents’ responsibility; that the lien has been satisfied; and that it has been 
erroneously attributed to Applicant in his credit history. In short, the record evidence as a 
whole refutes SOR 1.a as the basis for application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), or 19(f). 
 
In the alternative, even if I concluded that Applicant was responsible for the tax 
lien, it has been resolved for more than six years. Accordingly, the record also supports 
application of the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
6 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The record does not contain any other adverse information about Applicant’s 
finances. On balance, Applicant presented sufficient information to refute the single 
allegation against him, as well as to mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. 
 
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in context 
of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). The record evidence as a whole shows 
that the doubts raised by the DOD CAF’s information have been resolved, and it supports 
a fair and commonsense conclusion in favor of Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for continued security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
