1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01616 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On June 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J, G, and E. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 28, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on September 5, 2018, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant provided no response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, 
identified as Items 1 through 7, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on January 17, 2019.  
02/06/2019
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He obtained his general equivalency diploma (GED) in 
2002 and his master welder’s license in 2007. Applicant has been employed as a 
master welder by a federal contractor since 2017. He reports no military service and he 
married in May 2016. Applicant has two daughters, age 3 months, and 10 years old. In 
section 22 (Police Record) of his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86) 
or security clearance application (SCA), he disclosed an arrest for driving under the 
influence (DUI) in July 2012. He pled guilty to a reduced charge of reckless driving in 
April 2013. He completed probation and community service; paid fines and costs; and 
attended mandatory, court-ordered DUI-counseling sessions one day each week from 
April to October 2013. He disclosed another arrest for DUI in November 2016.    
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was also arrested for DUI and criminal mischief 
in July 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant pled no contest to reduced charges of reckless 
driving and criminal mischief in October 2005, and he was sentenced to one year 
probation and ordered to complete a DUI level one program. Applicant admitted all of 
the allegations in the SOR in his answer to the SOR in July 2018. (Item 3) He also 
admitted to five other driving offenses including: driving while license suspended in 
2006, 2008, and 2017 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.i) and driving in violation of court-ordered 
license restrictions in 2007 and 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g). Additionally, Applicant 
admitted being charged with possession of drug paraphernalia in January 2007. (SOR ¶ 
1.c) State court records provided by Department Counsel corroborate Applicant’s 
admissions and confirm his multiple criminal offenses. (Items 6 – 7)  
 
In his personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant stated that his latest November 
2016 DUI occurred after he had dinner and three beers with friends and he was pulled 
over by police. Applicant’s blood alcohol content (BAC) was .09 and the state law 
threshold for DUI is .08 BAC. Again, he paid fines and $2,000 in court costs plus 25 
hours of community service, and one year probation. He completed mandatory alcohol 
abuse counseling in January 2018, and his license was revoked for one year. 
Nonetheless, Applicant continued to drive since he needed to get to work and felt he 
had no other choice. In 2007, when he was charged with possession of marijuana, it 
was provided to him at a party. He never purchased or sold marijuana, and claims to 
have used it only this one time. (Item 5, pp. 20-21)  
 
 Applicant denied the cross-alleged violations under Guidelines G and E, at SOR 
¶¶ 2 and 3. He ascribes his afore-mentioned mistakes to youthful immaturity in his 
answer to the SOR. He professes his intent to not re-offend. Applicant provided no 
response to the FORM or character references or performance evaluations. He 
provided no documentary evidence that he attends treatment or Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) or other support groups, or that he has acknowledged his longstanding pattern of 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s June 30, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 4), or his personal subject interview (PSI) on February 26, 
2018. (Item 5)  
 
 
3 
 
 
maladaptive alcohol use. He provided no evidence of modified consumption or 
abstinence from alcohol. 
 
                                         Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Administrative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
 
4 
 
 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
31(a) a pattern of minor offenses; any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness; and  
 
31(b) evidence, (including but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
.  
 Applicant has admitted to three arrests for DUI and possession of drug 
paraphernalia. His admissions are corroborated by the record evidence including court 
records provided by Department Counsel, which provide details. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (b) 
have been established by the Government’s evidence. (Items 5 - 7) The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
          Applicant was arrested for DUI in 2005, 2012, and 2017. His last arrest for driving 
on a suspended license was in June 2017, and he was convicted after he completed his 
SCA. This was his fifth arrest for either driving on a suspended license or on a restricted 
license. Applicant is incorrigible. While he completed court-ordered alcohol awareness 
courses at least twice following his DUI arrests, Applicant has apparently not learned 
from his earlier mistakes. His conduct, on whole, for over a decade, reflects a flagrant 
disregard for laws and rules of the road. It is not likely that he will follow rules and 
regulations with respect to handling classified information. AG ¶ 32 (d) only partially 
applies, if at all.   
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant had three alcohol-related incidents, the DUI arrests in 2005, 2012, and  
2017. SOR. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c) are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
6 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
My analyses above under Guideline J is the same under this administrative 
guideline G, and are herein incorporated by reference. Applicant has completed two 
court-ordered, mandatory DUI courses. Nonetheless, Applicant provided no evidence or 
assurance that he has modified his drinking or that he abstains from alcohol. AG ¶¶ 32 
(d) partially applies to mitigate the cross-alleged allegations at SOR ¶¶ 2.a.  
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a pattern of rules violations and his long-term 
conduct indicates an inability or unwillingness to modify his behavior and comply with 
laws and rules of the road for safe driving. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d)(3) are implicated.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could potent ia l l y  mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
My analyses above under Guidelines J and G are the same under this this 
Guideline E, and are herein incorporated by reference. Applicant has completed two 
court-ordered, mandatory DUI courses. While AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) may have some 
applicability, they are not enough to overcome Applicant’s well-established pattern of 
violating the law and ignoring rules, such as when he drove drunk three times, and 
drove with either a restricted or suspended license on five occasions. While some of his 
driving offenses may be considered minor, the repetitiveness and frequency of his 
violations show a pattern of bad judgment. Applicant has produced no documentation 
showing that he has overcome his drinking problem, modified his consumption, or now 
practices abstinence with the aid of AA or other support group.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR. He has longstanding and ongoing 
criminal, alcohol, and driving offenses going back to 2005. He has offered nothing to 
assure the Government that there will be no recurrence. He has not met his burden of 
production.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:               Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline G:                      Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                                  Against Applicant 
 
            Paragraph 3, Guideline E:                       Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:                                    Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                               
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
