 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01751 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 5, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On April 16, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86).  
(Government Exhibit 1.) On September 6, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the 
DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 26, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on October 29, 
2018, and the case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge that same 
day.  The notice of hearing was issued on November 15, 2018, scheduling the hearing 
for December 6, 2018.  The hearing was convened as scheduled.  At the hearing the 
 
2 
 
Government presented four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, 
which were admitted without objection.  Applicant presented no exhibits at the hearing.  
The record remained open until close of business on December 20, 2018, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  Applicant’s submitted 
three Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A through 
C, which were admitted without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 17, 2018.  Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.   
  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old and is married with three grown children.  He has a high 
school diploma and some college.   He is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Security Associate.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016, and that he has four delinquent 
debts totaling approximately $13,000. Applicant admits his failure to file his Federal 
income tax returns in a timely fashion, as well as the back taxes, but denies the other 
debts set forth under this guideline.  Credit reports of Applicant dated June 25, 2016; 
and October 15, 2018, reflect that each of the debts remain outstanding.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibits 3 and 4.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since 2015.  
 
 Applicant states that for many years his wife was the breadwinner in the family, 
while he stayed home with the children.  He also trusted his wife to handle the 
household finances as well as their taxes.  During this period, they struggled financially 
and did not earn enough money to support the family.  At some point, Applicant learned 
that their income tax returns were not being filed on time.  Applicant states that they 
contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and set up a payment plan.  During those 
years, Applicant was not involved in the family finances. 
 
1.a., and 1.b.  Applicant testified that things have changed with how the household 
finances are handled.  Applicant is now much more involved in the family finances.  
Applicant has worked hard to make sure that all of his Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2011 through 2016 have been filed.  (Tr. p. 23.)  He has provided copies of each 
of the Federal income tax returns in question.  At the time of the issuance of the SOR, 
he owed approximately $11,685 in unpaid back taxes.  Since September 2018, 
 
3 
 
Applicant has been on a payment plan with the IRS and pays $160 monthly toward his 
back taxes that is automatically deducted from his paycheck.  On December 18, 2018, 
Applicant updated his installment agreement to include tax years 2014, 2016, and 2017. 
He now owes approximately $16,393 in back taxes.  Effective January 17, 2019, 
Applicant’s new monthly payment to the IRS is $200.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 
C.)      
 
1.d. A judgment was filed against the Applicant in August 2010 in the approximate 
amount of $1,100.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt.  He believes this is an 
identity theft issue or mix up as the judgment is not his.  He contacted each of the three 
credit reporting agencies and disputed this debt.  The debt was removed from two of his 
credit reports and is in the process of being removed from the third.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit B.) 
 
1.e.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$243.  Applicant had no knowledge of the debt.  After attempting several times to 
contact the creditor, who never answered the telephone, Applicant contacted each of 
the three credit reporting agencies and disputed this debt.  The debt was removed from 
two of his credit reports and is in the process of being removed from the third.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.) 
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$45.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt.  After contacting the creditor who could 
not provide him with any information, he contacted each of the three credit reporting 
agencies and disputed this debt.  The debt was removed from two of his credit reports 
and is in the process of being removed from the third.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 
B.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from the Director of Security Administration who is 
also the Facility Security Officer, a Security Supervisor, and a representative from the 
human resources department reflect that Applicant is considered to be a valuable 
employee.  He is described as a reliable, hard worker, who is honest and forthcoming.  
He has a solid work history, a strong sense of duty, a great deal of integrity, and 
constantly strives to make sure that he is doing the right thing.  He also follows all 
security rules and regulations with regard to the proper handling of sensitive materials.  
(Applicant’s Post Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
 For many years, Applicant was not involved in the family finances and taxes and 
allowed his wife to handle those matters, as they filed jointly.  At some point, during 
those years, he learned that he failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 on time.  He also learned that he became 
indebted for back taxes in the amount of approximately $11,685.  His actions 
demonstrate both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and    
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
          For many years Applicant thought he could trust his wife to file their tax 
returns and he was not involved.  From this experience, he has learned that he 
must be involved in all financial matters including the taxes in order to ensure 
 
6 
 
that they are timely filed.  He is now involved in his household finances.  He has 
filed all of the Federal income tax returns in question, and is making regular 
monthly payments to the IRS each month to resolve his debt.  He has disputed 
the other three delinquent debts listed on his credit reports, and they have all 
been removed from two of the credit reporting agencies, and the third agency is 
in the process of removing them, as none of the three delinquent debts are 
actually his.  There is a clear pattern of systematic payments to show financial 
responsibility.  There is sufficient evidence here to show that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances and that he demonstrates reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
