 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00980 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
February 14, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 5, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 31, 2018. 
As Applicant Counsel’s firm had scheduling conflicts, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) could not issue a notice of hearing until November 2, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for November 27, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were admitted after 
Applicant authenticated GX 2. (Transcript (TR) at page 38 line 4 to page 39 line 16.) 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called three witnesses to testify. Applicant 
 
2 
 
presented documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through H, and 
11~17. DOHA received the TR on December 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 13.) He has been employed with the defense contractor since October of 2014. (GX 
1 at page 13.) He graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1999, and achieved the 
rank of Lieutenant Commander until his departure from active duty in 2008. (GX 1 at 
pages 19~29, and AppX B.) While on active duty, Applicant went to “Justice School,” 
and was certified as “a legal officer.” He has held a security clearance since 1999. (Id, 
and TR at page 39 line 19 to page 41 line 25.) 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. and 1.b. Applicant failed to file both his Federal and state income tax returns, 
in a timely fashion, for tax years 2012~2016. (TR at page 28 line 20 to page 37 line 25, 
and at page 41 line 13 to page 48 line 20.) He was working several jobs, had some non-
life-threatening health issues, and a romantic break up with his “girlfriend.” (Id.) He 
avers that if he was due a refund; he was not required to file, but would forfeit any 
refund. (TR at page 29 lines 2~21.) In light of Applicant’s education from a U.S. military 
academy, coupled with his attending the Naval Justice School, I find this averment not 
to be credible. 
 
 Applicant subsequently filed all of his delinquent tax returns in May of 2018, as 
evidenced by documentation of those filings. (AppXs D, H and 24~29.) It is interesting to 
note, that on his 2012 Federal income tax return (FITR) Applicant owed $1,322, and on 
his 2014 FITR he owed $969. (AppX D.) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor, prior supervisor, and a co-worker testified as to 
Applicant good character. (TR at page 15 line 22 to page 26 line 11.) However, his 
current supervisor was surprised by Applicant’s averment as to Applicant’s lack of 
understanding of his responsibility to file his income tax returns. (TR at page 17 line 18 
to page 18 line 6.) Applicant also submitted a favorable reference from another co-
worker. (AppX C at page 5.)    
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
4 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant failed to file five years of income tax returns in a timely fashion. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Although Applicant filed his delinquent income tax returns in 2018, his 
procrastination is troubling. He also owed on his FITRs for tax years 2012 and 2014. 
These debts to the Federal government were delinquent for five and three years, 
respectively, until his 2018 filings. He has not acted reasonably with respect to his legal 
obligation to file his income tax returns. Guideline F is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
5 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant has a laudable history of 
working in the defense industry and is respected by his supervisors and co-workers. He 
performs well at his job. However, overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
