1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
     -------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00241 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He provided sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate 
the financial problems he encountered with a residential investment property, which 
resulted in a past-due mortgage loan that was eventually resolved by a foreclosure sale 
in September 2018. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, the official form used for personnel security investigations, 
on January 25, 2017.1 This document is commonly known as a security clearance 
application. Thereafter, on February 13, 2018, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement 
1 Exhibit 1. 
02/28/2019
 
2 
 
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 26, 2018. He admitted the sole allegation 
in the SOR, which concerned a past-due mortgage loan in the amount of about $18,000 
for a residential investment property known herein as the Lincoln Street property. He 
also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me August 3, 2018. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on October 10, 2018. Applicant appeared without counsel. Department 
Counsel offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1-6.  Applicant’s 
documentary exhibits were admitted as Exhibits A-C. No witnesses were called other 
than Applicant. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received October 19, 2018.  
 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. After 
multiple extensions of time, the record closed December 31, 2018. The e-mails from 
both Applicant and Department Counsel as well as Applicant’s post-heating exhibits are 
admitted as Exhibits D-H.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security 
clearance. He is employed as an information system security officer. He has worked for 
the same company since 2016. He was unemployed for a four-month period during 
2016, but has otherwise been continuously employed as a federal contractor since at 
least 2005. He is divorced with two teenage children who live with their mother in 
another state. He owned and occupied a residential property during 1997-2009, and he 
has since rented or leased a residence.  
 
Applicant does not dispute a past-due mortgage loan and subsequent 
foreclosure sale of the Lincoln Street property. It was one of five residential investment 
properties he bought in about 2005 or 2006. All five were located in the same large, 
urban city. Some properties he bought for cash at relatively low purchase prices (e.g., 
$12,000 and $14,000), while he financed the purchase of others. He purchased the 
Lincoln Street property, a one-unit four-bedroom townhouse, with a mortgage loan of 
about $75,000.   
 
The value of all five properties fell due to the historic bursting of the housing 
bubble.2 A new mortgage lender acquired the mortgage loan for the Lincoln Street 
property, and Applicant sought a loan modification without success in 2010.3 Applicant 
hoped the market would improve to allow a sale of the property, but its market value fell 
                                                          
2 It is well known that the bursting of a real-estate bubble and the resulting credit crisis were important 
factors in the 2007-2009 recession in the United States.  
 
3 Tr. 28.  
 
3 
 
to about $50,000 and he could not find a buyer, so he decided to rent it.4 The property 
was rented for about 2 years during an 11-year-period, although every rental 
arrangement ended in eviction of the tenant.5 In the meantime, he kept paying on the 
mortgage loan and was unable to obtain assistance regarding a loan modification from 
the mortgage lender.6  
 
The situation with the Lincoln Street property became more difficult in 2016, 
when Applicant lost his job and was unemployed for several months.7 As a result, he 
was unable to make the monthly mortgage loan payment, and a foreclosure action was 
commenced via a judicial proceeding in December 2016.8 Over the next 21 months or 
so a loan modification, short sale, and deed-in-lieu of foreclosure were attempted 
without success.9 The Lincoln Street property was sold in a foreclosure sale for $39,500 
in September 2018. The report of sale filed with the court and other paperwork does not 
reflect a deficiency balance.10 At the hearing, Applicant was unware of a deficiency 
balance, but thought he may owe real estate taxes on the property for the nine months 
he owned it in 2018.11 In post-hearing submissions, he stated that he was told by the 
mortgage lender that he will receive a Form 1099 in January 2019.12 
 
In addition to the Lincoln Street property, Applicant had another problematic 
residential investment property known herein as the Washington Street property.13 It 
was not alleged in the SOR, but Applicant had an opportunity to discuss it during the 
hearing and he provided relevant documentation as well.14 He bought the house for 
cash for about $12,000 to $14,000 in 2005.15 The property was never occupied 
                                                          
4 Tr. 29.  
 
5 Tr. 29.  
 
6 Tr. 30.  
 
7 Tr. 30.  
 
8 Exhibit 6.  
 
9 Tr. 30-35.  
 
10 Exhibit D.  
 
11 Tr. 35-36.  
 
12 Exhibits E, F, and G.  
 
13 Exhibits A, B, and 5.  
 
14 Because the Washington Street property was not alleged in the SOR, I did not consider it for 
disqualification purposes. But I have considered it for two limited purposes: (1) it is part of the 
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s investment portfolio, which was the source of his financial 
difficulties; and (2) in evaluating the presence or absence of Applicant’s evidence in mitigation.  
 
15 Tr. 42; Attachment to Answer to SOR.  
 
 
4 
 
(Applicant said “it is just a shell”),16 and he worked over the years and spent more than 
$120,000 to rehabilitate the property in order to obtain a use-and-occupancy permit 
from the city.17 His intention now is to sell the property.  
 
Going back to 2009, the city brought an action seeking an injunction, which 
resulted in a consent judgment against him for a vacant building notice on the 
Washington Street property.18 In 2012, he was found in contempt of court and a fine in 
the amount of $14,400 was entered against him personally as the owner. Under that 
state’s law, a money judgment constitutes a lien on the judgment debtor’s interest in 
land located in the county in which the judgment was entered. That meant the multiple 
properties he owned in the same city were encumbered by the lien.  
 
In 2012, Applicant spoke with a representative of the city about a possible 
reduction of the fine upon obtaining a new use-and-occupancy permit for the 
Washington Street property.19 In 2013, he applied for six permits, none of which had 
final inspections. Several years later in August 2018, Applicant spoke to the city to 
resolve the matter. The city proposed the following offer: once the Washington Street 
property passes inspection and is issued a new use-and-occupancy permit, the city will 
agree to accept half of the original contempt fine ($7,200) as payment and, upon receipt 
of payment, the city will submit a notice of satisfaction to the court. After further work 
and difficulties, Applicant met the terms of the city’s offer, and the case was resolved as 
reflected in an order of satisfaction of judgment filed by the city with the court on 
December 28, 2018.20  
 
Other than the matters discussed above, Applicant’s current financial situation 
appears to be stable. A January 2018 credit report lists the past-due mortgage loan for 
the Lincoln Street property, but otherwise lists no derogatory financial accounts.21 At the 
hearing, Applicant stated that he had about $26,000 in checking and savings 
accounts.22 He earns an annual salary of about $150,000.23 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
16 Attachment to Answer to SOR.  
 
17 Tr. 42-43.  
 
18 Exhibit A.  
 
19 Exhibit B.  
 
20 Exhibits E, F, and G.  
 
21 Exhibit 3.  
 
22 Tr. 65-66.  
 
23 Tr. 64.  
 
 
5 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.24 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.25 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”26 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.27 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.28 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.29 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.30 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.31 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.32 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                          
24 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
25 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
26 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
27 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
29 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
30 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
31 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
32 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
6 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.33 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.34 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .35 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and   
                                                          
33 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15 
 
34 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
35 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.   
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial 
problems or difficulties that is sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. In 
reaching this conclusion, I considered the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s history 
of financial problems. Obviously, the most significant circumstance was his investment 
portfolio consisting of multiple residential properties acquired during 2005 or 2006. In 
short, it appears Applicant bit off more than he could chew. He became financially 
overextended due to the decrease in value of the properties and the various expenses 
associated with ownership of multiple properties. Those matters were the source of his 
financial distress as opposed to a more typical financial case where an applicant’s 
delinquent debts resulted from consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or 
irresponsible spending.   
 
 Concerning mitigating conditions, Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 20(a), 
because his financial problems originated under usual circumstances (e.g., the bursting 
of the real-estate bubble) that are unlikely to recur. Because he resolved the 
delinquencies on both the Lincoln and Washington Street properties, his history of 
financial problems does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 20(b), because the financial problems were 
caused, at least in part, by circumstances largely beyond his control. He bought the 
properties in 2005 or 2006, which was near the peak of the then real-estate bubble. 
Shortly thereafter the real-estate bubble burst and he suffered the consequences of 
owning multiple properties that were declining in market value. The decline in value 
resulted in difficulties in refinancing or modifying loans, and some of the properties were 
difficult to rent or sat vacant as he worked to make them suitable for rental. In addition, 
he acted responsibly under difficult circumstances. He did not walk away from the 
properties or declare bankruptcy. He held onto the properties and worked over a period 
of years to salvage his investment, which is evidence of long-term commitment and 
responsible behavior.  
  
  AG ¶ 20(d) is also applicable in Applicant’s favor. He presented reliable 
documentation showing the past-due mortgage loan on the Lincoln Street property, 
which is alleged in the SOR, was resolved by a foreclosure sale in September 2018, 
shortly before the hearing in this case. He expects to receive a Form 1099-C in January 
2019, which is a record of a tax liability stemming from any cancellation of indebtedness 
by the mortgage lender. Given his salary and cash reserves, he should have no 
difficulty in paying an income tax obligation, assuming one exists.  
 
 Likewise, he presented reliable documentation showing satisfaction of the 
judgment in December 2018 stemming from the fine imposed on him in 2012 for the 
Washington Street property. This matter was not alleged in the SOR. Obviously, 
Applicant took far too long to resolve this matter, which began in 2009 with the filing of 
the consent judgment. But it is noted that Applicant was working with the city on this 
 
8 
 
matter in both 2012 and 2013, the property required various repairs and improvements 
along with inspections and permits, and he had to pay the associated expenses from his 
normal cash flow as opposed to relying on an unlimited source of funding. These things 
take both time and effort to accomplish.  
 
 Concerning the good-faith standard in AG ¶ 20(d), I am mindful of the copious 
Appeal Board caselaw on post-SOR remedial actions in financial cases. While it’s true 
that Applicant resolved both the past-due mortgage loan and the unpaid judgment after 
issuance of the SOR, it’s also true that he worked on an on-again, off-again basis to 
resolve the issues with these two properties over a period of years that preceded the 
SOR. In other words, this is not a case where Applicant was engaged in massive 
procrastination or simply ignored the problem and only took action upon receipt of the 
SOR. Given the totality of facts and circumstances, I am satisfied that the totality of his 
remedial efforts were made in good faith and were not done simply in response to the 
SOR.   
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I 
conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility granted.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
