 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05683 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 10, 2009, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted the government’s written case on December 11, 2009. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM on January 6, 2010. She did not 
object to the admission of the items attached to the FORM and they are admitted. The 
case was assigned to me on January 28, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since June 2009. Applicant served on active duty in the United 
States Army from 1999 until she was honorably discharged for medical reasons as a 
sergeant in 2006. She attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. She 
also attended a technical institute. She married in 2000 and divorced in 2003. She 
married again in 2008, but is separated. She has two children, ages eight and two.1  
 
 Applicant had sporadic employment after she was discharged from the Army, 
with periods of unemployment and low-paying jobs. Her current husband also had 
multiple jobs and they moved often before they separated. This led to a number of 
delinquent debts.2   
 
 The SOR alleges 33 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.h, 1.j, 1.m, 1.t, 1.u, 1.v, 1.z, 1.aa, and 1.ae. Those debts 
total $3,774, and range from $53 owed to the U.S. Post Office (SOR ¶ 1.q), $55 owed to 
a pizza restaurant for a returned check (SOR ¶ 1.ae), to $823 owed for cellular 
telephone services (SOR ¶ 1.h).3  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.ad, but she 
stated the debts had been submitted to her medical insurance for payment. She did not 
submit any documentation to support her assertion. The $193 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f 
is a medical debt. The collection company named in SOR ¶ 1.ad has a name that 
sounds like it might refer to an emergency room, but the debt it is collecting is a $515 
debt owed to a telephone services company. The $193 debt is listed on credit reports 
obtained in May 2009 and August 2009. The $515 debt is listed on the May 2009 credit 
report, but not the August 2009 report.4   
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debts of $760 and $630 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.w and 
1.y, but she stated the debts were her ex-husband’s accounts. The $760 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.w is listed on the credit reports as an individual account that was opened in 
April 2006. The $630 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.y is listed on the credit reports as an 
                                                          
1 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
2 Items 3, 4; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
3 Items 1, 3.  
 
4 Items 1, 3, 5, 6.  
 
 
3 
 
individual account that was opened in August 2004. She did not submit any 
documentation to support her assertion that these debts were her husband’s 
responsibility.5   
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debts of $3,000 and $10,427 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.q 
and 1.af, but she stated the debts were duplicates. She also stated that she is making 
payments to catch up. The credit reports indicate that these are duplicate accounts. The 
most recent report shows the debt as $3,000 past-due, with a balance of $11,000.6   
 
 Applicant denied the allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.o, which alleged she 
had a delinquent debt of $4,296 and an unpaid judgment of $13,789. She admitted she 
owed the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.o, but she stated the amounts owed were less 
than what was alleged in the SOR. She stated she owed $1,300 to the SOR ¶ 1.i 
creditor and $8,000 to the unpaid judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o.7   
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debts of $697, $1,553, and $1,460 alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.n, and 1.p, stating that the accounts were “[p]aid in full.” The $697 
delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is to a university. It is listed on both 2009 credit 
reports. SOR ¶ 1.n alleges an unpaid judgment of $1,553 awarded to a computer 
company. SOR ¶ 1.p alleges an unpaid judgment of $1,460 awarded to an apartment 
landlord. There is some indication in the May 2009 credit report that the judgments may 
have been satisfied. Based upon the inconsistent information in the credit reports, there 
is insufficient evidence for a finding that the judgments remain unpaid.8  
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $257 to a collection company on 
behalf of what appears to be a jewelry company. This debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r. 
She stated the account was over seven years old and “[k]eeps reappearing on credit 
report under another agency.” The debt is listed on both credit reports from 2009.9 
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($1,328), 1.c 
($3,599), 1.g ($306), 1.k ($328), 1.l ($268), 1.s ($837), 1.x ($718), 1.ab ($42), 1.ac 
($46), and 1.ag ($647). She stated she had “[n]o knowledge of [the] account[s].” All of 
the debts, with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.ab and 1.ac, appear in 
the August 2009 credit report. Those two debts appear in the May 2009 report, but not 
the later report.10   
 
                                                          
5 Id.  
 
6 Id.  
 
7 Items 1, 3, 5-7.  
 
8 Id.  
 
9 Items 1, 3, 5, 6.  
 
10 Id.  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant stated that she has had problems with the credit agencies reporting 
inaccurate information about her. She stated the credit reports showed two different 
social security numbers and reported that she was deceased as of July 2006. She 
placed a credit fraud alert on her accounts in December 2008. She retained a law firm 
to dispute inaccurate items on her report. She submitted documents from the law firm 
dated August 13, 2009 and October 13, 2009, indicating that the law firm sent challenge 
letters to the credit reporting agencies. She did not submit evidence of which debts were 
being challenged, nor did she submit any results of the challenges. She submitted no 
evidence of payments of any of the debts.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
                                                          
11 Item 3; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
 
5 
 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved most of the debts alleged in the SOR. Her financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment and low-
paying jobs after she was discharged from the Army. Her current husband also had 
multiple jobs, and they moved often before they separated. These all qualify as 
conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has worked for 
her current employer since June 2009. She did not submit evidence of any payments 
even on the small debts. She did not present a plan on how she will address her 
delinquent debts. I am unable to make a determination that she acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant may have received some financial counseling from the law firm that is 
assisting with her credit. She is employed, but there is insufficient information in the 
record for a finding that there are clear indications that her financial problems are 
resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing a number of the debts alleged in SOR. She stated her 
credit reports showed two different social security numbers and reported that she was 
deceased as of July 2006. She placed a credit fraud alert on her accounts in December 
2008. A law firm sent challenge letters to the credit reporting agencies, but Applicant did 
not submit evidence of which debts were being challenged, nor did she submit any 
results of the challenges. All the debts are listed on at least one of the credit reports in 
evidence. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.ab and 1.ac appear in the May 2009 credit 
report, but not the August 2009 report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts and the 
duplicate debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q. It is not applicable to any other debt.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s honorable service in the United States Army. She has experienced financial 
difficulties since being medically discharged related to unemployment and 
underemployment. She Is now employed by a defense contractor. However, at this 
time, there is not enough evidence in the record for me to conclude that her finances 
are in order.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Subparagraphs 1.r-1.aa:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.ab-1.ac:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.ad-1.ag:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
