 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-11916 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his exercise of foreign 
citizenship, including the possession of a current foreign passport. He also did not 
mitigate security concerns raised by his substantial ties to Russia through which he 
could be subjected to adverse foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
He voluntarily disclosed his dual U.S.-Russian citizenship, as well as his connections 
and property interest in Russia.  
 
On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances 
raised security concerns under the foreign preference and foreign influence guidelines.1 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
On July 26, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, admitted all the SOR allegations, 
waived his right to a hearing, and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record.2  
 
 On July 22, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the SOR, Applicant’s answer, and 
responses to two interrogatories, which were admitted into the record as Exhibits 1 – 4. 
Department Counsel also submitted with the FORM a request for administrative notice, 
Exhibit (Ex.) 5, which is discussed below.  
 
 On August 31, 2015, Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM.3 He was 
provided 30 days from its receipt to file a response, but did not submit one. 
 
 On December 1, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case and provided a copy of 
the FORM. On my own motion, I opened the record to provide him a last chance 
opportunity to submit a response to the FORM. He was also advised of the serious 
security concerns raised by his possession of a current foreign passport and that such 
concerns may be mitigated by surrendering or relinquishing the passport as set forth in 
the Directive.4 Applicant did not submit a response or provide additional documentation. 
The record closed on December 15, 2015. 
 
Administrative Notice: The Russian Federation (Russia) 
 
 DOHA administrative judges may accept for administrative notice 
uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts regarding a foreign country from official U.S. 
Government reports. Additionally, the official position of relevant federal agencies or the 
pertinent statements of key U.S. Government officials regarding a foreign country may 
be appropriate for administrative notice. The party requesting administrative notice of a 
particular matter must provide the source document, either the pertinent parts or the full 
document, to allow the judge and, if necessary, the Appeal Board to assess the 
reliability, accuracy, and relevancy of any administratively noticed fact. See generally, 
ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 12, 2007).  
 
Department Counsel did not submit the source documents (or, relevant portions 
thereof) with the FORM. Instead, Department Counsel’s request for administrative 
notice, Ex. 5, cites to the web addresses where the source documents can be located. 
Recently, the Appeal Board held that, irrespective of whether an applicant raises an 
objection to a matter requested for administrative notice, citation to a web address alone 
is insufficient. The Board went on to reiterate its long-held position that the actual 
source document the judge relies upon for an administratively noticed fact must be 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 Hearing Exhibit II. 
 
4 Hearing Exhibit III. 
 
3 
 
 
made a part of the record. See ISCR Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015), case 
remanded because the source documents not included in the record.5  
 
Accordingly, I have marked and included in the record as Hearing Exhibit IV the 
source documents (or, the pertinent portions thereof), which provide a basis for the 
following relevant facts regarding Russia:6 
 
 Russia “has a highly centralized, weak multi-party political system dominated by 
President Vladimir Putin.”7 A recent human rights report from the U.S. State Department 
reflects that the Russian government committed significant human rights violations and 
“the [Russian] government failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most 
officials who committed abuses, resulting in a climate of impunity.”8 
 
 In 2015, the Director of National Intelligence reported to Congress that the 
leading state intelligence threats to the United States will continue to come from two 
main countries, one of which is Russia.9 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Russia. He received a commission 
as an officer in Russia’s reserve military forces and worked for a time for the Russian 
Defense Ministry. He immigrated to the United States in 1997 and married his wife, who 
is also originally from Russia, in 2002. They have one child, who was born in the United 
States.  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2005. Applicant, his wife, and his child all 
have dual U.S.-Russian citizenships. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has 
                                                          
5 Department Counsel’s “failure” to submit the source documents is understandable as the FORM 
predates the cited Appeal Board decision. Arguably, Ex. 5 could be admitted as a summary of the 
pertinent facts contained in the source documents. See generally, Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 
(Federal Rules of Evidence (F.R.E.) shall serve as a guide in DOHA proceedings and technical rules of 
evidence may be relaxed to permit the development of a full and complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 
1006. However, based on the present record, I cannot find that Applicant’s failure to raise an objection to 
Ex. 5 amounts to an agreement as to the exhibits accuracy, reliability, and relevancy. Contrast with, ISCR 
Case No. 14-03112 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015), after applicant concurred with its content, the only evidence 
regarding the foreign country was the administrative notice request that was admitted as a summary. 
 
6 Applicant was provided notice regarding these source documents with the FORM. He was also provided 
ample opportunity to challenge or provide additional information regarding the matters requested by the 
Government for administrative notice. Although the Government’s citation to 26 source documents raises 
potential notice and fairness concerns, the additional time Applicant was provided to respond and provide 
additional information ameliorated any such concerns.  
 
7 Director of National Intelligence, Statement for the Record, Senate Armed Services Committee, 
Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community at 4, February 26, 2015.  
 
8 U.S. State Department, Russia 2013 Human Rights Report at 1.  
 
9 Id. at 1-2.  
 
4 
 
 
voted in Russian elections and twice renewed his Russian passport. His current 
Russian passport is due to expire in 2022. He is unwilling to surrender or relinquish his 
Russian passport because he may need it to travel to Russia on short notice to visit his 
elderly parents.  
 
Applicant has a number connections and contacts in Russia. Notably, Applicant’s 
parents and his wife’s mother and her siblings are citizens and residents of Russia. 
Applicant’s father used to work for the Russian government. His parents are now 
retired. Applicant has traveled to Russia to visit his family, with his most recent trip 
occurring in 2012. He has used his Russian passport to travel to Russia. He owns an 
apartment in Russia, which he has left to his parents to dispose of as they see fit. He 
and his wife maintain contact with their relatives and at least one friend in Russia. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
 
5 
 
 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the foreign preference security concern arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Applicant actively exercised his foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
citizen, including voting in Russian elections and renewing, using, and maintaining a 
Russian passport. This record evidence raises the foreign preference security concern 
and establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a).10 The foreign preference 
guideline also sets forth a number of potential mitigation conditions. I have considered 
all the mitigating conditions and none apply. Notably, Applicant currently has a foreign 
passport and is unwilling to relinquish or surrender it. A current or prospective clearance 
holder is ineligible for a security clearance unless s/he surrenders it to the cognizant 
security authority (CSA), invalidates the foreign passport, or receives approval from the 
CSA for his/her continued possession and use of the foreign passport. See AG ¶¶ 11(d) 
and 11(e). Applicant did not supply any information that any of the preceding 
circumstances apply. Accordingly, foreign preference security concerns remain.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
                                                          
10 Exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . . This 
includes . . .  (1) possession of a current foreign passport; . . . (7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
6 
 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.11 
 
 An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and interests in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must take into 
account the foreign government involved; the intelligence gathering history of that 
government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.12  
 
 Applicant and his wife’s connections and property interest in Russia raise the 
foreign influence security concern. The record evidence, to include the matters 
accepted for administrative notice, establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless 
of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e):  a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 An applicant with close family members and interests in a foreign country faces a 
high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added) (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
12 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge 
must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
7 
 
 
foreign ties. Furthermore, an applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign 
country before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”13 However, 
what factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an 
applicant with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.14 An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in these types of cases 
must be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and consideration of 
the adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set forth in the Directive. 
A judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the overarching standard 
in all security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by an applicant’s 
circumstances must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 I have considered all the foreign influence mitigating conditions and, based on 
the record evidence, none apply. Even if I assume for the sake of argument that 
Applicant’s property and non-familial connections in Russia are not significant enough to 
cause a conflict of interest with his security obligations, his and his wife’s close 
relationship to their family members in Russia raise a concern about his vulnerability or 
susceptibility to adverse foreign influence. Applicant’s relatives in Russia are subject to 
the dictates of a government whose respect for human rights and the rule of law is, at 
best, questionable. Moreover, Russia has been identified by the U.S. Government as 
continuing to pose an intelligence threat. Applicant’s familial connections in Russia, 
coupled with the threat posed by the current Russian government to its own people and 
the security threat it poses to the United States, raises a heightened risk that Applicant 
could be subjected to adverse foreign influence. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate this security concern. However, this adverse finding is “not a 
comment on Applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people may act 
in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member.” ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).15 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guidelines 
B and C. I gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this 
case, including Applicant’s honesty about his foreign connections from the start of the 
security clearance process. Furthermore, I recognize that Applicant left Russia nearly 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
15 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
20 years ago and has made the United States his home. However, his possession of a 
current Russian passport and close familial connections in Russia through whom he 
could be adversely influenced raise serious security concerns. Accordingly, after 
weighing the favorable and unfavorable evidence, I find that he failed to mitigate the 
security concerns at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about 
his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.h:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
