 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-08752 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct).  The 
SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On January 20, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a decision 
based on the administrative record, without a hearing before an administrative judge. 
On February 23, 2015, Department Counsel requested a hearing pursuant to Paragraph 
E3.1.7 of the Additional Procedural Guidance of Enclosure 3 of the Directive. On June 
1, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On June 5, 
2015, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me.  
 
On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 10, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did 
not call any witnesses, and did not offer any exhibits. On July 20, 2015, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation. His SOR answer 
is incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old test engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
September 1986. He seeks a security clearance to enhance his position within his 
company. Applicant previously held a security clearance from 1987 to 1996. (GE 1; Tr. 
14-16) 
 
Applicant was awarded his GED in 1981. He was awarded an associate of 
science degree in electronic technology in June 1986. (GE 1; Tr. 17-18) Applicant was 
married from June 1986 to February 1992. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant 
remarried in February 1996. He has two adult sons from his previous marriage and 
three children from his current marriage -- an 18-year-old son, a 13-year-old son, and a 
9-year-old daughter. Applicant’s wife is not employed outside the home. (GE 1; Tr. 18-
32) Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 18) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In August 1996, at age 31, Applicant was convicted of handling and fondling a 
child under the age of 16, a 2nd degree felony. He was sentenced to two years of 
community control, placed on supervised probation for ten years, ordered to pay a fine 
and court costs, make restitution to his victim, complete sex offender counseling, have 
no contact with the victim or her family, and required to register as a sex offender. (SOR 
¶ 1.a) Applicant completed all requirements of his sentence, but remains a registered 
sex offender. Applicant and the victim’s mother are employed by the same company 
and he sees her at work, but does not speak to her. (GE 2, GE 3; Tr. 23-24, 28, 31) 
 
 As a registered sex offender, Applicant is required to report to the local sheriff’s 
office twice a year for address verification and is also subject to two unannounced 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
annual home visits. He is required to register his vehicles as well as his home and work 
e-mail addresses and his driver’s license is annotated. Applicant is subject to certain 
travel restrictions. Community control is the equivalent of house arrest. While on 
community control, he was required to inform his probation officer of his daily 
whereabouts seven days in advance. State law requires that Applicant remain a 
registered sex offender for life. However, he may apply to be removed from the registry 
25 years after completing probation in 2033. (GE 4, GE 5; Tr. 24-31) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based 
this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about 
applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying with respect to Applicant’s felony conviction for gross sexual 
imposition. 
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. At the time of Applicant’s conviction, 
he was 31 years old and the victim was under 16 years old and the daughter of a fellow 
employee. Applicant’s questionable judgment at the time of committing the felonious act 
that led to his conviction is so egregious that it is not mitigated by the passage of time. 
Moreover, the offense was not minor, and the circumstances under which it occurred 
cast doubt on Applicant’s good judgment. Applicant has completed all requirements of 
his sentence, but remains a registered sex offender and will remain so for the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
foreseeable future. His home state also considered his offense serious enough to 
require “eyes on” address verification, annotation of his driver’s license, registration of 
his vehicles, e-mail addresses, and telephone numbers, and imposition of travel 
restrictions.  
 
 After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and 
evaluating the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,1 I conclude Applicant did 
not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guidelines E 
security concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:  
   
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
1
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
