1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-07969 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 23, 2012. On 
December 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2015; denied all the allegations; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed on October 29, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on November 
23, 2015. On November 30, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
2 
 
notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 16, 2015. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until January 15, 
2016, to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He did not submit any 
additional evidence. At my request, Department Counsel submitted information 
regarding the applicability of the Servicemembers’ Civil Relief Act (SCRA),1 which is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) III.2 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on December 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has been employed a defense contractor since December 2011. He 
worked part time for this contractor while still on active duty in the U.S. Navy. He served 
in the U.S. Navy from January 1992 to January 2012, when he retired as a petty officer 
first class. While on active duty, he was deployed three times. During his military 
service, he was awarded the Navy-Marine Corps Commendation Medal, and he 
received four awards of the Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal. (AX A.) He held a 
security clearance while in the Navy, but it expired after he left active duty. (Tr. 8.)  
 
Applicant married in July 1993 and divorced in September 1995. He married his 
current spouse in October 1997. He and his current spouse have two sons, ages 8 and 
15. He took college courses in 2008, 2009, 2011, and 2012, but he did not receive a 
degree.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed the automobile repossession 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. His May 2012 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected the 
repossession as well as a mortgage foreclosure on a resort property (alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a) and a delinquent credit-card debt for $513 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c). 
 
 Applicant purchased a time-share resort property in 1998. He fell behind on his 
payments due to the expensive maintenance fees. He was able to pay the mortgage 
loan but unable to pay the annual $3,000 maintenance fees in full. He tried to sell the 
property in 2002, without success. (Tr. 29-31.) The lender foreclosed on the property in 
July 2006. The balance due after foreclosure was about $3,298. (GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 6.) 
Applicant testified that he assumed the foreclosure and sale of the property satisfied the 
debt, because he did not receive any deficiency notices. He first learned about the 
deficiency when he was questioned by a security investigator in 2012. He testified that 
he was unable to make contact with anyone who could agree to a settlement of the 
deficiency. (Tr. 32-33.)  
 
                                                          
1 After reviewing the SCRA, I have concluded that it does not protect Applicant, because the financial 
obligations in this case were not incurred before his entry into military service. 
 
2 HX I is the Department Counsel’s Exhibit List. HX II is the letter from Department Counsel to Applicant, 
transmitting copies of the documents that would be presented at the hearing. 
3 
 
 Applicant opened a charge account with a discount department store in July 
1998. He stopped using the charge card but did not realize that he was accruing 
monthly maintenance fees on the account. In April 2012, the account was referred for 
collection of $513. (GX 2 at 12.) Applicant was unaware of the debt until he saw his 
credit report after submitting his SCA. He testified that he paid the debt by credit card 
but did not have a receipt for the payment. (Tr. 37-38.) The debt is not reflected in his 
October 2014 CBR.  Because less than seven years have elapsed since the debt was 
charged off and referred for collection, the absence of the debt on his most recent CBR 
indicates that it was resolved.3  
 
 In late 2005 or early 2006, Applicant was transferred from a duty station in the 
western United States to a duty station in the mid-Atlantic United States. For reasons 
not reflected in the record, his mail was forwarded to an incorrect address, and he did 
not receive his monthly bills. After he missed two payments on his automobile loan, his 
car was repossessed without notice. Applicant contacted the lender and offered to bring 
the payments up to date. The lender refused his offer and sold the automobile. The 
lender claimed a deficiency of $10,139, but Applicant estimated the deficiency to be 
$7,648. The deficiency was not unresolved. (GX 1 at 32; GX 2 at 2.) 
 
 In November 2006, Applicant was diagnosed with cancer and received 
chemotherapy in February 2007. (AX B.) He receives disability pay of $2,000 per month 
in addition to his military retired pay. His net monthly income is about $6,147. His 
monthly expenses are about $1,794 and his debt payments are about $1,780, leaving 
him a net monthly remainder of about $2,573. (GX 2, Personal Financial Statement.) 
Applicant’s October 2014 CBR reflected delinquent debts. He has several active credit 
cards, a mortgage loan on his residence, and a car loan, all of which are current.  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a (alleged time-share deficiency) and 1.b (alleged 
repossession deficiency) are not reflected in Applicant’s October 2014 CBR. The state 
statutes of limitation have run on both debts.4 
  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection or 
charged off that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of limitations has 
run, which is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
4 A table reflecting the statutes of limitation for each state can be found at www.bankrate.com.  
4 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence establishes the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. The debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c has been resolved. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are sufficient to 
raise two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established for SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant purchased the time-share 
property when he was a young and inexperienced sailor, and he did not understand the 
financial implications of the purchase. The mortgage was foreclosed and the property 
sold in 2006, nine years ago. His naïve venture into resort-property ownership was an 
6 
 
isolated incident, not likely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is also established for SOR ¶ 1.b. The repossession of his car 
occurred nine years ago. Since the repossession, he has managed his finances 
responsibly.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the car repossession in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s 
reassignment under military orders and the misrouting of his mail were circumstances 
beyond his control. Undoubtedly, he should have realized that he had not made his car 
payment for two months. However, he was dealing with the innate disorganization of a 
cross-country move. When he realized that he had missed two car payments, he acted 
responsibly by contacting the creditor and attempting to resolve the delinquency, to no 
avail. Applicant’s bout with cancer also was a circumstance beyond his control. 
However, it occurred after the repossession, and there is no evidence that it contributed 
to his failure to make timely payments on the automobile loan. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is established for the credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but not for 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, which have not been paid. Although the 
statutes of limitation have run for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, reliance on a statute 
of limitations “is not normally a substitute for good-faith efforts to pay off debt.” ISCR 
Case No. 07-16427 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010.) However, the non-collectability of the debts 
is relevant, because it greatly reduces Applicant’s vulnerability to coercion or duress 
and the temptation to engage in illegal conduct to generate funds. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has a long record of honorable military service. He held a security 
clearance throughout his Navy career, apparently without incident. He was candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The record reflects that Applicant has put his financial 
mistakes behind him, and his financial situation is under control. The evidence leaves 
me with no doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
