 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 12-08599 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 1998 Applicant was arrested and charged with a serious felony. He was 
sentenced to two years of incarceration, followed by eight years of probation. Resulting 
criminal conduct security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2014 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On September 9, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on July 20, 2015, and was received by him on July 23, 
2015. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit additional material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. He timely replied to the FORM, and did not object to the 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 in the FORM. He submitted an 
exhibit that I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, to which the Government had no 
objection. All Items and Applicant’s exhibit are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on October 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was married to 
his first wife from 1982 to 1995. He had two children born of this marriage, one born in 
1983 and the other in 1985. The oldest child was killed in Iraq while serving in the 
Marines. He married his current wife in 2010. (Item 3.) 
 
 Since November 1975 Applicant has worked for his current employer. He was 19 
years old when he was hired. He held a confidential clearance through another Federal 
department until 1999. On April 16, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application (SF 86) through his employer. (Items 2, 3, 4.)  
 
 On December 11, 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of 
cocaine with the intent to deliver, a felony. The cocaine was valued at $8,000. He was 
convicted in June 1999 and sentenced to 10 years in jail, with 2 years to be served in 
jail, and 8 years to be suspended. He was incarcerated from June 1999 to July 2000 
and then placed on parole until June 2001. Thereafter, he was on probation until June 
2009. While serving his first year in the correctional system, he was admitted into a 50-
week work release program. (Items 4, 5, 6.) He was 43 years old at the time of the 
conviction and had been working as a supervisor for 15 years for his current employer. 
(Items 2, 4.) In June 1999 his confidential clearance was revoked as a result of his 
arrest. (Item 5.) In his Answer, Applicant said that he committed the crime for financial 
gain because at the time he was divorced, supporting two households, and paying child 
support. (Item 2 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant worked for his current employer while in the work release program for 
50 weeks, and continued to work there through his sentence, and subsequent to it. To 
date, he has worked there for about 40 years and received promotions throughout his 
employment. In 2014 he became a planner specialist and is now interested in entering 
the management team. He expressed gratitude to his employer, who has been 
supportive throughout the years, especially subsequent to his conviction. (Item 2.)       
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation from people who have known 
and worked with him for many years. All of them attest to Applicant’s competency, 
leadership abilities, reliability, and trustworthiness. They discuss his volunteer work in 
the community and compliment his mentoring skills. The authors of the letters state that 
Applicant accepted full responsibility for his conduct, successfully completed his 
sentence, and is a respectable citizen. They do not believe he poses a security risk. 
(Item 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
 
4 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, reads in 
pertinent part: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
  In December 1998 Applicant was arrested and charged with possessing cocaine 
with the intent to deliver, a felony and serious crime. The evidence raises the above 
security concern, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant has not been involved in criminal behavior since 1998, about 17 years 
ago. That fact is sufficient to establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). In addition to 
the passage of time without the recurrence of criminal activity, Applicant expressed 
 
 
5 
 
 
remorse for his crime, and presented evidence of a good employment record over the 
years through letters from four colleagues and friends. Applicant provided some 
evidence of mitigation under AG ¶ 32(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 59-year-old 
adult, who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
alleged in the SOR. In 1998, at the age of 42, he made a decision exhibiting very poor 
judgment, which resulted in his involvement in the criminal justice system for more than 
10 years. He committed a felony because he was having financial problems. Since 
completing criminal probation in 2009, Applicant has continued to rehabilitate himself 
and has gained the support of four colleagues and friends. Although he presented some 
impressive evidence of mitigation from his colleagues, it is insufficient to overcome the 
seriousness of the felony conviction and subsequent long sentence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his criminal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
