 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-08972 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On April 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 17, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
September 22, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 2, 2015. He was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 
30-day period, which was received without objection.1 On December 1, 2015, the case 
was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a lengthy narrative response that 
neither affirmatively admitted or denied the SOR allegations, as instructed.  
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior technical specialist employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2000. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his 
current employment. (Items 2, 3)  
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 1980 and a master’s degree in 
1984. He did not serve in the armed forces. (Item 2) Applicant married in 1988. There is 
no record of dependents in the FORM. (Item 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists five allegations: (1) a 2007 state tax lien for $13,722; (2) a 
2014 state tax lien for $7,898; (3) a failure to timely file federal tax returns for tax years 
2006, 2009, and 2010 -- as of the SOR date, 2009 and 2010 federal tax returns had not 
been filed; (4) a failure to timely file state tax returns for tax years 2006, 2009, and 2010 
-- as of the SOR date, these tax returns had not been filed; and (5) an unpaid $49 
medical debt. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e)  
 
During Applicant’s April 2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that he had filed extensions for his federal and state 
taxes for the past ten years because he was overwhelmed with paperwork. He was not 
overly concerned with filing because the federal and state tax authorities were receiving 
their needed taxes through paycheck withholdings. (Item 3) During that same interview, 
he claimed that he filed 2009 and 2011 state and federal tax returns and that he did not 
owe any taxes for either year. (Item 3) 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In his July 2015 SOR answer, Applicant stated that his issue is “not really one of 
financial problems per se, but of disorganization.” (Item 1) He discussed various 
aspects of his financial and tax history, but provided no relevant documentation that 
addressed the specific concerns raised in the SOR. Applicant also stated that he 
expected to have his “filings current by the end of the year.” (Item 1) Department 
Counsel put Applicant on notice of his financial shortcomings and deficiencies in 
documentation in his FORM.  
 
Applicant’s FORM response did little to enhance his situation. He provided 
documentation from his certified public accountant (CPA) that he had filed his 2006 
federal tax return late, but no documentation that addressed his remaining federal and 
state tax returns. Applicant did provide documentation that his state had levied 
$18,057.61 against his bank account on January 7, 2015, that according to Applicant 
“may address a. and possibly part of b.” It is unclear from the documentation whether 
this levy applies to one, both, or part of the two state tax liens alleged. (FORM 
response) In both his SOR answer and in his FORM response, Applicant mentioned 
that he has a CPA, and in his FORM response, he stated that his CPA would address 
his tax returns. (Item 1, FORM response) Applicant provided documentation that he 
paid his $49 medical debt in July 2015. (FORM response) 
 
There is no record evidence of financial counseling. Applicant stated that “these 
financial issues seem to paralyze me. I would much rather be addressing the technical 
issues associated with training pilots or now, the additional duties of caring for my 
elderly father.” (FORM response) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.”  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented not 
only in his credit report, but also in the additional evidence submitted by Department 
Counsel. (Items 2 – 6) The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Considering the record evidence as a whole,3 AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the $49 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but does not apply to the 2007 and 2014 state tax 
liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  Waiting for a state tax authority to levy against 
your bank account is not indicative of a good-faith effort to repay creditors. Apart from 
the $49 medical debt, none of the five financial considerations mitigating conditions 
above are applicable or partially applicable to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
remaining SOR allegations. The available information shows that Applicant has taken 
little or no affirmative action to resolve the financial shortcomings.  
 
It is also somewhat perplexing that an individual with Applicant’s level of 
education and job responsibilities with access to a CPA would allow his financial state of 
affairs to deteriorate to the extent that they have. Applicant was put on notice on at least 
three separate occasions that these matters were a concern to the Government --  
during his April 2012 OPM PSI, after receiving his April 2015 SOR, and after receiving 
his September 2015 FORM.  
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.4 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, 
the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [she] has 
established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [her] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.5 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
                                                          
3
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
5
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
explanation, lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,6 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
6
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
