 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07451 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. He also failed to establish that he does not have a financial problem and 
that his finances are under control. Guideline F security concerns are not mitigated. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 26, 2012, 
seeking to retain a clearance required for his job. On April 20, 2015, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2015, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 30, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated August 21, 2015. He 
acknowledged receipt of the FORM on September 8, 2015. Applicant was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material in rebuttal, 
extenuation, and mitigation. As of November 5, 2015, Applicant had not responded to 
the FORM or submitted any information. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on December 1, 2015. 
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Department Counsel's submission included a summary of a personal subject 
interview on April 20, 2012. (Item 8) The summary was not authenticated as required by 
the Directive E3.1.20. Department Counsel's submission included a footnote advising 
Applicant that Item 8 was not authenticated and that failure to object to Item 8 might 
constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. However, a pro se applicant's failure to 
object to an unauthenticated personal subject interview is not tantamount to waiver of 
the authentication requirement. Waiver means "[t]he voluntary relinquishment or 
abandonment - express or implied - of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to 
have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and the 
intention of forgoing it." Black's Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., 
West 2009). The record does not reflect that Applicant understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not reflect that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of Item 8. Thus, Item 8 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.i, and 1.k 
through 1.n, with explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.j. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old laboratory technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 1988 until 1999, when he was 
honorably discharged. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 1997, and received a 
master’s in business administration in 1999. Applicant claimed that he is a disabled war 
veteran. He married his first spouse in 1989 and divorced in 2002. He married his 
second spouse in 2005 and divorced in 2012. As of his answer to the SOR, he had not 
remarried. He has three adult children ages 26, 25, and 22.  
 
Applicant was first granted access to classified information at the secret level in 
1988, during his period in the service. The DOD continued his eligibility for a secret 
clearance in 2002, after Applicant was hired by his current employer, a federal 
contractor. Applicant has continuously possessed a security clearance since then.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial record) of the 2012 SCA that he had 
financial problems, which included a delinquent credit card account, a defaulted loan, 
and accounts that were more than 120 days delinquent. The subsequent security 
clearance background investigation disclosed the 14 delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR, totaling about $43,000, that are established by the FORM’s credit reports and 
Applicant’s admissions. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that his financial problems were 
the result of his 2012 divorce, the downturn of the U.S. economy, and the collapse of 
the housing market in his state. After his divorce, Applicant’s income was insufficient to 
pay his living expenses and existing financial obligations. 
 
Concerning the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant explained that it 
became delinquent during the divorce process. He tried to sell the house twice, but the 
buyer’s loans were not approved by the bank and the sales fell through. He then tried to 
refinance or modify the loan, but was unsuccessful. He averred that the refinancing was 
denied because of two delinquent credit card accounts his ex-wife opened without his 
knowledge. Applicant believes that the mortgage creditor has until January 2016 to 
settle or waive on the loan balance. He anticipates suing the creditor if it does not waive 
the loan. 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.b. He claimed he was unaware of the debt, believed 
the account belonged to his ex-wife, and promised to investigate it and dispute it. SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i are delinquent accounts for utilities and services Applicant or 
his children received. He promised to settle or dispute some of them, and he promised 
to pay most of them in the near future.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, and 1.k through 1.n are delinquent accounts for medical 
services provided to Applicant or his children. He averred they were unpaid because his 
ex-wife did not notify him of the charges, or he did not receive notice because of his 
many residence moves. Applicant stated in his SOR answer that “most of these (debts) 
are minor and will be paid and or settled immediately.” Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence of any efforts taken to investigate, contact creditors, pay, or 
otherwise resolve any of the above delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant noted that he served 11 years on active duty in the Air Force, and was 
honorably discharged. Since his discharge, he has worked for a federal contractor on a 
job that requires his eligibility for a clearance. He has held a clearance during the last 25 
years without any security issues or concerns. There is no evidence to show that 
Applicant has ever compromised his security clearance or had any security issues, 
except for the current SOR allegations. 
 
The July 2015 credit report (Item 7) shows Applicant paid three accounts for less 
than owed (in 2009, 2010, and 2011), and three delinquent debts owed to a cable 
provider (paid in February 2012). None of the paid accounts were alleged in the SOR. 
All of the SOR accounts are reflected as delinquent accounts in the 2015 credit report. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided little information about his financial situation. He did not 
provide any information about his income, monthly expenses, and whether his current 
income is sufficient to pay his current living expenses and debts. There is no information 
to indicate whether he participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a 
budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG lists disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
Applicant’s 14 SOR delinquent accounts raise the applicability of two financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are ongoing, and his evidence is insufficient to establish that he in 
control of his financial problems. He has been fully employed during the last 14 years. 
However, he presented little documentary evidence of any efforts to contact creditors, 
pay, or otherwise resolve his debts, since he acquired them, or after he submitted his 
2012 SCA. In his answer to the SOR, he promised to take care of the “minor” delinquent 
 
6 
 
 
debts, but failed to do so and provided little explanation for his lack of action, except for 
blaming his current financial problems on his 2012 divorce.  
 
 Even considering Applicant’s divorce as a circumstance beyond his control that 
contributed or aggravated his financial problems, Applicant failed to present sufficient 
evidence to show that he was financially responsible under his circumstances to warrant 
applicability of AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
 Moreover, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income and 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his living expenses and 
debts. There is no information to show that he participated in financial counseling or that 
he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to establish clear 
indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial 
problem is being resolved, or is under control. In sum, Applicant failed to establish that 
he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his 11 years in the service and 15 years working for 
a federal contractor while possessing a security clearance without any security issues or 
concerns, except for those in the current SOR.   
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to establish a 
track record of financial responsibility, that he currently does not have a financial 
problem, and that his finances are under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
