 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-11697 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 18, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 5, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 25, 2015. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On August 3, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1-4, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
was provided to the Applicant on September 15, 2015. He was given the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on September 25, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on October 25, 2015.  
 
I received the case assignment on November 9, 2015. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Paragraph 1 concerning foreign influence 
and admitted the allegation in Paragraph 2 concerning foreign preference. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. His is married and has two adult children who were 
born in the United States. His wife is a dual citizen of Colombia and the United States. 
They were married in 1988. Applicant was born in Colombia in 1962. He came to the 
United States in May 1985. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1996. 
From 1999 to the present he has worked as a hazmat technician for a private company, 
a laborer, a handyman, and a cleaner supervisor for a custodial company. Applicant’s e-
QIP states he has been investigated for a security clearance but does not disclose 
when the background investigation was done. (Items 1-4) 
 
 Applicant applied for a Colombian passport in January 2011. He used that 
passport to exit Colombia in 2011. He surrendered this passport to his Facility Security 
Officer in 2012. He has a U.S. passport that expired August 8, 2014. Applicant voted in 
the Colombian presidential election in May 2010 at the Colombian Embassy in 
Washington, D.C. In his June 24, 2015 Answer Applicant stated he renounced his 
Colombian citizenship in December 2012. He submitted a copy of his renunciation 
document. (Items 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant’s parents live in Colombia and are citizens of that country. Their ages 
make them senior citizens of Colombia and they do not have jobs according to the e-
QIP. His three sisters are citizens of Colombia and work there. Applicant maintains 
contact with his parents weekly by telephone, as he does with his sisters. One of his 
sisters is an attorney, another is an economist, and the third is not employed. The 
employers of either of his sisters are not identified.  (Items 1-3)  
 
 Applicant’s father and mother-in-law are citizens of Colombia. They live there. 
They both do not work at the present time. Applicant has weekly telephone contact with 
them. (Items 1-3) 
 
Department Counsel submitted Item 4, which is the Administrative Notice about 
Colombia. The Notice includes references to the U.S. Department of State documents 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
pertaining to Colombia. I take administrative notice of materials related to Colombia. 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 
89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Colombia’s government has been engaged for nearly 50 years with insurgent 
and paramilitary groups involved with illegal drug production and trafficking. The U.S. 
State Department designated three Colombian groups as terrorist organizations. They 
are the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army 
(ELN), and the United Self-Defense Forces of Columbia (AUC). The Colombian 
government started peace talks with FARC in late 2012. A travel warning was issued 
U.S. citizens in November 2014 about the dangers of traveling in Colombia. It also 
referred to violence perpetrated by terrorist’s games and armed criminal gangs. 
 
Human rights abuses continue in Colombia. Unlawful and extrajudicial killings 
continue, forced disappearances, insubordinate military collaboration with new illegal 
armed groups, violence against women, and human trafficking. Anyone born in 
Columbia is considered a Colombian citizen. Dual Colombian and U.S. citizens are 
required to present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. His Answer does state his two sons were born and raised in the U.S. and he 
has been married for 25 years. The sons work and attend college in the U.S. Applicant 
states his “life, priorities, and loyalty reside in this country.” (Statement with his Answer) 
He means the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has constant contact with his family and his wife’s parents, all of whom 
live in Colombia. The contact is weekly by telephone. This contact and familial 
connection create the heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. AG ¶ 7 (a) applies. 
 
The same contact with these relatives creates a potential conflict of interest 
between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and 
Applicant’s desire to help a foreign person by providing that information. AG ¶ 7 (b) 
applies.  
 
Applicant is married to a woman who is a dual Colombian and U.S. citizen. Her 
parents live in Colombia. They live together and that could create a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶ 7 (d) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
conditions may apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s relatives in Colombia are either retired because they are old or not 
working for some other reason, except for one sister who is an attorney and another is 
an economist. Their employers were not stated anywhere in the documents Applicant 
submitted. The familial relationships are close but maintained at a distance. None of 
Applicant’s relatives are described as having any employment or relationships that 
would place Applicant in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
relatives in Colombia and the interests of the United States. The internal turmoil of 
Colombia is far removed from Applicant and his relatives. There is no evidence that the 
family in Colombia is connected or threatened in any way with the groups fighting the 
government. AG ¶ 8 (a) is established.  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1985 when he was about 23 years 
old. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996. He raised two sons in the U.S. and worked in 
various jobs for the past 31 years. His Answer stated his strong connections are to the 
United States where he has made a life for himself. He has been married for 25 years to 
his wife who is a U.S. citizen. His strongest connections are to the United States, not 
Colombia. AG ¶ 8 (b) is established.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Applicant possessed a Colombian passport that he applied to receive in January 
2011. He used it to travel from the United States to Colombia in 2011. Applicant also 
voted in a 2010 Colombian presidential election. AG ¶ 10 (a) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s actions in obtaining a Colombian passport and voting in the 
Colombian presidential election is the type of action a person takes to obtain recognition 
of a foreign citizenship while holding U.S. citizenship. AG ¶ 10 (b) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions may apply: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant was born in Colombia and that is how he obtained dual citizenship. AG 
¶ 11 (a) applies.  
 
 Applicant renounced his Colombian citizenship in a written document in 2012 that 
was included in the Applicant’s Answer. AG ¶ 11 (b) applies.  
 
 Applicant surrendered his Colombian passport in 2012 to his facility security 
officer. It is no longer valid because of the surrender and his renunciation of his 
Colombian citizenship in 2012. AG ¶ 11(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he applied 
for a Colombian passport and used it to travel to Colombia. He voted in the 2010 
Colombian presidential election. He only committed these actions once. Now he 
understands that he cannot maintain the dual citizenship he had and has renounced it in 
writing. He places his emphasis in the U.S. because he has his immediate family in the 
U.S. and his assets. He has changed his behavior. There is no likelihood he will repeat 
this past course of conduct because he realizes he must place his full emphasis on the 
U.S. and Colombia holds no benefit for him now after he immigrated and became a U.S. 
citizen.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns under the guidelines for Foreign 
Influence and Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
     _________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
     Administrative Judge 
 
