 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-10196 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 28, 2012, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 19, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on an unstated date. She answered 
the SOR in writing on May 11, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 30, 2015, and I received 
the case assignment on July 13, 2015. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 
27, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 20, 2015. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, which were received without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 3, 2015. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of 
the SOR. This allegation was the only one in the SOR. She also provided additional 
information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 65 years old, married, and has three children from her first marriage 
and two stepchildren from her present marriage. They are all adults. Applicant is a truck 
operator for a defense contractor. She receives a salary. She operates the truck with 
her husband as a co-driver. Applicant has a current security clearance. (Tr. 9, 20-22, 
27, 28; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges a tax debt owed to the federal Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) for the 2008 tax year for $35,881. The tax lien dates from 2011. Applicant used 
her income to pay other debts and fell behind on the federal taxes for 2008. (Tr. 29; 
Exhibits 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant testified the tax debt is a debt she owes. She stated she has an 
installment payment agreement with the IRS and pays $500 each month since 2011. 
She first received a notice of tax due from the IRS in 2010. The balance now owed is 
about $4,319.75 according to her testimony, the copies of the installment agreement, 
and the IRS notice of the tax balance submitted by Applicant, and her Answer. The IRS 
took her 2014 tax refund and she expects it will do the same to her 2015 tax refund, 
which will pay off the balance or close to it. She also disclosed the debt on her e-QIP. 
Applicant does not owe any other federal, state, or local taxes. She is current on all her 
financial obligations. She wants to get to a cash basis for payment of her debts. This 
debt is being resolved. (Tr. 29-40; Exhibits B, C, 5-8) 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter dated November 15, 2015, from the vice-president of 
the trucking company that employs Applicant. He stated she has worked for his 
company since 2003. Applicant and her husband are rated as very professional drivers, 
making all appointments on time, and in full compliance with all federal, state, and 
Department of Defense rules and regulations while working. (Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $35,881 in delinquent tax debt from 2008 that apparently 
remained unpaid. Applicant has one delinquent debt listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s tax debt arose in calendar year 2008. It is the only tax debt she has to 
pay because all her other taxes are paid and current. The statements she made at the 
hearing about paying her debts on time and trying to get to a cash only payment system 
show Applicant will not allow the same situation to occur in the future. This tax debt is a 
one-time situation and is not likely to recur. It does not cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20 (a) is established. 
 
Applicant pays her tax debt in an orderly manner pursuant to an IRS installment 
payment agreement. Therefore, there is clear proof from the evidence she presented 
that the tax debt is under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) is established.  
 
Applicant worked to get her tax debt paid by an installment agreement basis. She 
succeeded and the debt now is less than $5,000 and the balance owed is being paid 
monthly at the rate of $500 each time. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-
faith efforts to repay her delinquent debt.  
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant only had the one tax debt 
from 2008 and is paying that debt down so that it may be completed within the next 
year. The $500 monthly payment and the application of her 2014 and 2015 income tax 
refunds to the balance owed should resolve the debt totally in 2016. She did not plan in 
advance the withholding or quarterly payments for her joint return on the 2008 taxes. 
This failure to arrange the necessary tax withholding or payments has not been 
repeated nor is it likely to be so. There is no potential for any pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
      
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
