                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-12051
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 2, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on June 8, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On June 30, 2015, the Department
of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DoD could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 30, and August 6, 2015, and he
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative
Judge.  This case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 13, 2015.  A
notice of hearing was issued on November 5, 2015, scheduling the hearing for
November 19, 2015.  At the hearing the Government presented five exhibits, referred to
as Government Exhibit 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant
presented no exhibits. He testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until
close of business on November 27, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional
supporting documentation.  Applicant did not submit any documentation.  The official
2
transcript (Tr.) was received on December 1, 2015.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 50 years old, and married.  He has a high school diploma and served
20 years in the military with various technical schools.  He is employed with a defense
contractor as a Maintenance Technician and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated July 7, 2012; December 11, 2014; and September
30, 2015; reflect that Applicant is indebted to three separate creditors in an amount
totaling in excess of $72,000.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4.)  
    
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy from 1984 until he
retired in October 2004.  In August 2005, he started working for his current civilian
employer.  He held a security clearance throughout his entire military career and during
his current employment without incident.
    
Applicant fell behind on his bills, and accumulated debt that he did not pay.  (See
Answer to SOR.)  According to his credit reports, the following three debts remain
outstanding:  1.(a), a delinquent credit card debt that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $37,753 remains outstanding.  Applicant testified that he
believes the original amount of the debt was $10,000, but over time, the debt increased
to around $30,000.  He thought that he had paid it off, but that it must have fallen
though the cracks.  He further explained, in his June 2015 SOR response, that he
planned to cash out his 401(k) by the end of September 2015 and pay off the debt. He
offered no evidence during or after his hearing of any payments.  (Tr. pp. 22-33.)  1.(b),
a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $10,491 remains outstanding.  Although
Applicant admitted the debt in his answer to the SOR, he testified now that he does not
believe that it is his debt.  He did not dispute the debt, nor did he do anything to verify
whether he still owed the debt.  (Tr. p. 36.) 1.(c), a delinquent debt owed to a creditor
that was placed into collection in the amount of $24,166 remains outstanding.  Applicant
believes that this debt pertains to the debt set forth in 1.a.  (Tr. p. 37.)  Applicant had no
3
definite answers with respect to any of the delinquent debts.  He was not sure about
them because he had not contacted the creditors to find out.  
It appears from Applicant’s most recent credit report, dated September 30, 2015,
that each of these delinquent debts, over the course of time, have fallen off of his credit
report.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
Applicant has failed to submit any evidence to show that he does not owe the
debts.  He did not contact the creditors, nor did he start making payments toward his
debts, or resolve them.  He has not produced a receipt or statement from a creditor
confirming that any of his debt has been paid, or a settlement reached, a cancelled
check, or a new credit bureau report showing final payment.
Applicant states that his intention is to pay off his delinquent debt.  (Answer to
SOR.) He also plans to contact his creditors to work something out.  (Tr. p. 46.)  He has
provided no documentary evidence showing that he has contacted his creditors about
his situation, nor is there any evidence demonstrating that he has paid off anything, or
that he has made any payments to reduce his debt or even that he has set up a
payment plan.       
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
Applicant denies the allegation set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing, (a
security clearance application),  dated June 8, 2012, and answered, “NO,” to a series of
questions concerning his finances.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Section 26 asked, “In the
past seven years, have you had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily
repossessed or foreclosed ?  Has he defaulted on any type of loan? . . . Had he had
bills or debts turned over to a collection agency? . . . Had he had any account or credit
card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? . . had he been
over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered? . . . Is he currently over
120 days delinquent on any debt?”   Applicant answered the questions falsely and failed
to list the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  
Applicant claims that at the time he completed the security clearance application
in 2012, he was unaware of the delinquent debts on his credit report.  Whether the three
debts are actually one debt owed to the same creditor, or whether the three debts
remain owing to separate creditors, Applicant has not made a good faith effort to
resolve his debts.  The record evidence shows that Applicant should have at the very
least disclosed one delinquent credit card debt.  He disclosed nothing, and denied
having such debts by responding, “No,” to the questions.  Applicant is extremely familiar
4
with the questionnaire and has been completing it for over 30 years now.  The questions
on the application are not complicated or complex.  Applicant knew or should have
known to answer the questions truthfully and candidly, which he did not.    
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
 
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
6
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility and dishonesty or
conduct  which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
Furthermore, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F) and dishonest on his security
clearance application (Guideline E).  The evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
In regard to his personal conduct, Applicant was not truthful and candid with the
Government on his security clearance application when he intentionally omitted relevant
information concerning his finances.  At the time he completed the application in 2012,
he knew or should have known that he had a number of delinquent debts.  The only
reasonable conclusion for not revealing the truth concerning his delinquent debts was
that he did not want the Government to know about them.  There is no excuse for this
misconduct.  I find that he deliberately concealed the information from the Government
on the application.  
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
7
Turning to his financial indebtedness, Applicant has not resolved his delinquent
debts.  Even after receiving the SOR, he did not contact the creditors in question to
inquire about the debts.  He testified that he does not believe that they are all his debts,
and that they may have originated from one debt.  However, he did not dispute these
debts or do anything to find out whether they are in fact his debts.  At the very least,
Applicant should have inquired to find out the particulars regarding the debts.  Instead,
he ignored the situation.  This is an indication of irresponsibility that demonstrates to the
Government that Applicant cannot be trusted with the national secrets.  Presently,
Applicant remains excessively indebted.     
 
Since Applicant has not started the process of resolving his debts, he must show
that he can and will resolve his debts.  At this time, there is insufficient evidence of
financial rehabilitation.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his
financial affairs.  Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a
security clearance.  In the event that he resolves his debts and does not incur any
further delinquencies, he may be eligible for a security clearance in the future.
However, not at this time.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has
failed to show that he has acted responsibly, and his delinquent debts have not been
addressed.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and his personal conduct, and the effects they can
have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that
the Applicant has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a
security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant
as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
SOR.   
8
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:       Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.          Against  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.b.         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.           Against  the Applicant. 
Paragraph 2:                  Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.               Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
