 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 12-11006   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to produce sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security 
concerns related to his defaulted mortgage and two other delinquent debts. He provided 
sufficient evidence to mitigate personal conduct security concerns raised by the non-
disclosure of those debts in his security clearance application. Based on the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 18, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) 
for re-investigation. On January 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 22, 2015 (AR), and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.) 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 12, 2015, and received by him on August 19, 2015. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit any documents or objections to the Government’s 
Items; hence, Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on December 10, 2015. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all three of the allegations 
contained in the SOR under Guideline F. He denied the sole allegation under Guideline 
E. (Item 4.) His admissions are accepted as factual findings.  
 
 Applicant is 64 years old and married for 44 years. He has worked for federal 
contractors since 1993 and held a security clearance since 2004. (Item 5.) 
 
 In 1978 Applicant purchased a home. In 2007 he refinanced his mortgage for 
about $130,000, resulting in monthly payments of $1,000. Between 2011 and 2012 he 
fell behind on the payments as a result of rising heating oil prices and medication costs 
for him and his wife. In February 2012 the bank modified his mortgage and he made 
payments accordingly. In February or March 2013, the bank rescinded the modification 
and refused to accept Applicant’s payments. Applicant has spent $15,000 on legal fees 
in an attempt to resolve the matter. When the SOR was issued in January 2015, 
Applicant’s unpaid mortgage was $19,889 past due with a balance of $143,443. 
Applicant did not submit any documentation confirming his efforts to resolve this matter 
or to indicate that it was resolved.  
 
 In addition to an unpaid mortgage balance, the SOR alleged two other delinquent 
debts. One is owed to a cellular company for $1,034 due since 2009; the other debt for 
$581 is owed to another creditor since 2012. Both are unresolved. 
 
 When he completed his July 2012 SF-86 for re-investigation, Applicant failed to 
disclose the mortgage and cellular debts to the Government.1 (Item 5.) In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant denied that he falsified his answers. He said he did not disclose the 
mortgage because the bank had modified the loan at the time he completed the SF-86, 
at which point he did not consider it delinquent. He thought the debt to the cellular 
company was paid. (Item 4.) 
 
 
                                                 
1 Under the personal conduct guideline, the SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant failed to disclose the 
mortgage default listed in SOR ¶ 1.a and the cellular debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. It did not allege that he 
failed to disclose the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The three delinquent debts alleged in the SOR accumulated between 2009 and 
2012. To date Applicant has been unable or unwilling to resolve the debts. The 
evidence raises the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to submit documentation that he has addressed the three alleged 
delinquent debts. Hence, they remain ongoing and raise questions about his reliability in 
managing financial obligations. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 
20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided some evidence that circumstances beyond his control 
contributed to the delinquent debts, namely an increase in the cost of heating oil and 
medications. However, he did not produce evidence to confirm his assertions that he 
attempted to manage the debt while it was accumulating. AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide 
mitigation of the security concerns. There is no evidence that he participated in financial 
counseling or that his financial problems are under control. Thus, he failed to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Although he stated in his Answer that he spent $15,000 to 
resolve the loan modification problem with the bank, he did not submit evidence to 
corroborate his assertions. Nor did he present information to establish that he made 
good-faith efforts to pay or resolve any of the three debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
Applicant did not dispute any of the alleged debts; thus. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant intentionally falsified his SF-86 because 
he failed to disclose a defaulted mortgage and a delinquent debt. Applicant denied that 
allegation. He did not consider the mortgage to be delinquent because it had been 
modified by the bank and he thought he had paid the 2009 cellular debt. His explanation 
for not disclosing the mortgage delinquency or the cellular debt is adequate and 
credible. SOR ¶ 2.a is found in his favor. As a consequence, an analysis of mitigating 
conditions is not warranted.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 64 years old. He 
has been employed by a defense contractor since 1993. In his Answer, he explained 
some of the problems related to his mortgage modification, but did not submit any 
documentation confirming his statement. Although the FORM gave him notice of the 
Department’s argument that he failed to produce sufficient evidence about the mortgage 
problem and the status of the other two delinquent debts, he failed to submit any 
additional information in the 30 days he had available to do so. Overall, the record 
 
 
7 
 
 
evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. The personal conduct guideline is found in his favor; however, he 
did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
   
           Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
