                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
         ------------------------------------                  )         ISCR  Case No.  12-11430         
                                                             )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jerome. S. Sepkowitz, Esq.
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On May 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 10, 2015, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on July 14, 2015. The case was scheduled for hearing on
2
August 5, 2015. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-
6). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on August 14, 2015.     
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement it with documented information about Applicant’s
foreclosure and whether there is any money owing on the first mortgage. She also asked
for a post-hearing opportunity to provide a personal financial statement. For good cause
shown, Applicant was granted 30 days to supplement the record. In September 2015 she
asked for additional time to supplement the record. Within the extended time approved to
supplement the record, Applicant supplemented the record with a cover letter from her
counsel, a summary of the creditor 1.b note, a creditor 1.a notice to accelerate, loan
modification communications, a foreclosure report, correspondence from creditor 1.b
regarding monies owed to creditors 1.b and 1.c, and a summary of pertinent state law
governing foreclosures in State A. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were admitted as
AEs G-N. Applicant’s furnished State A statute governing the availability of foreclosure
deficiency actions was admitted as HE 1 for legal guidance purposes.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accrued delinquent mortgages: a first
mortgage in the amount of $185,400 and a second mortgage with delinquent mortgage
payments totaling $8,096.  Allegedly, these mortgage debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied being indebted to any of the listed
creditors in the SOR. She claimed that correspondence from creditor 1.b confirmed she is
no longer personally liable to the creditor. She claimed that creditor 1.b was formally
known as creditor 1.c. She claimed she tried working with the primary lender (creditor 1.a)
and the collection companies to obtain an adjustment on her payments, or resolution of
her debt by other means. She claimed she contacted local realitors to explore short sale
possibilities. And she claimed that her home was sold in 2011 for more than the amount
of the creditor 1.a debt and claimed she reported her portion in the sale as income from
the sale in the tax document she was provided by creditor 1.a.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old program analyst of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in June 1996 and divorced her spouse in July 2003. (GE 1) she
has no children from this marriage. After earning her high school diploma in May 1990,
Applicant attended college classes between August 1990 and May 1996 (earning an
3
associate’s degree in May 1996), and a local university between August 1996 and
December 2009 (earning a bachelor’s degree in December 2009). (GE 1) She claimed no
military service. 
Applicant has been employed by her current contractor since June 2011. (GE 1)
Previously, she worked for another firm (2005-2011) as a senior security clerk and for
another firm between November 2004 and April 2005 as a security clerk. (GE 1) Applicant
reported periods of unemployment between August 2003 and November 2004, and
between October 1999 and November 2000. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant jointly purchased a home with another party in June 2006 and financed
her purchase with a 15-year $185,400 first mortgage and a $46,350 second mortgage,
both with creditor 1.a. (GEs 3-5 and AEs B-C and G-H; Tr. 30, 50, 55-56, and 60-63)
Creditor 1.a, in turn, sold its second mortgage to creditor 1.b in June 2011. (GEs 3-5 and
AE F; Tr. 63) Applicant’s mortgage payments for both mortgages totalled around $3,500 a
month, paid in one lump sum split between Applicant and her co-purchaser, with each
borrower having joint and several liability on the loans. (Tr. 30-32)  
Credit reports document that in July 2011, creditor 1.c became a servicing agent
for creditor 1.b. (GEs 3-5 and AE D) The same month, creditor 1.c issued a notice of
transfer of servicing rights to notify Applicant of its recent service transfer from creditor
1.b. (AE D) This transfer affected only the servicing rights of the second mortgage and did
not change the loan balance.  
In July 2006, Applicant and her co-purchaser became cohabitants. For the first
three years, Applicant was able to manage her share of the mortgage. Keeping up with
her mortgage payments became a problem for her, though, in February 2009 when her
co-purchaser began to receive lower child support payments from her ex-husband. By
October 2009, Applicant was struggling to meet her monthly payments on her mortgages
without much help from her roommate. (GE 2; Tr. 46-48, 51-54) Applicant tried numerous
times to refinance her first mortgage at a lower affordable rate, but was told consistently
by her lender that there was nothing they could do until she was late in her mortgage
payments. (GE 2; Tr. 29 and 34-38, 92)  
With counseling assistance from the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), Applicant tried working with her lender throughout 2009 and 2010 in
obtaining refinancing and short sale approvals. (GE 2; Tr. 35-36, 65-66) In preparation for
an expected short sale approval, she rented a nearby home for manageable rental
payments of $1,000 a month and notified both the lender and her supervisor of her
actions. (GE 2; Tr. 64-67)
In January 2010, Applicant received a notice from creditor 1.a of its intent to
accelerate the first trust deed if Applicant did not cure her default by February 2016. (AE
I) Applicant, in turn, made contact with the creditor in an attempt to cure the $790 default.
4
Between January 2010 and May 2011 (GE 2), she maintained regular contact with
creditor 1.a, exploring available options. (AEs J-K) She was offered a new second
mortgage at high rates, which she turned down in June 2011. (GE 2 and AEs J-K; Tr. 36-
38)  
Contemporaneously with her attempts to work with her creditor 1.a lender on loan
modification approvals, Applicant explored the sales market for properties like her own  in
her community. Convinced that there was no market for her property at a price sufficient
to satisfy both mortgages, she never listed her property for sale. (Tr. 91-92)  
Unable to find any local buyers for her property in the 2010-2011 time period,
Applicant contacted a local realtor about short sale possibilities and learned that her
home had been sold at auction in 2011 for $220,000 (documented). (GE 2 and AEs A and
L; Tr. 39-40, 66-67) This surprised Applicant, as she had never been notified of any
pending foreclosure sale. (Tr. 68, 90) Subsequently, she was sent an IRS 1098 form for
the same $220,000 sale amount. (GE 2) In June 2011, after learning of the sale of her
house, Applicant moved to her current residence, located near the site of her current
employer. 
Believing her mortgage debt with creditor 1.a had been settled, Applicant learned
from her OPM investigator in October 2012 that a collection agency (creditor 1.b) was
pursuing a $145,000 deficiency against her. (GE 2) She was never informed of this
collection action (Tr. 63-64, 68-69) and has never been pursued by either creditor 1.a or
creditors 1.b and 1.c for collection of any deficiency balance.
Applicant has since received a $792 settlement from a class action suit against
creditor 1.a and is in the process of cleaning up her credit reports. And in June 2015, she
received a letter from creditor 1.b that she is no longer personally liable on her second
mortgage account with creditors 1.b and 1.c. (AEs C-D) Creditor 1.b’s June 2015 letter
covers the listed second mortgage of creditor 1.b and 1.c, but does not address any
potential loan balances owing creditor 1.a following its foreclosure sale. (AEs C-D; Tr. 45-
46)
Both the Government’s most recent credit report and Applicant’s most recent credit
reports reveal no outstanding balances owed either creditor 1.a or creditors 1.b and 1.c.
(GE 5 and AEs C-D and M) Inferentially, Applicant’s listed delinquent debts with each of
these creditors have been fully satisfied from the public auction of Applicant’s foreclosed
residence and resold by creditor 1.a to a third party in March 2012. (AE N). Credit reports
and real estate sales reports confirm that Applicant’s foreclosed property produced a sale
price sufficient to cover the remaining loan balances.
Applicant maintains excellent credit and lives within her means with reduced
reliance on credit cards. (AE B; Tr. 48-49) In her most recent financial statement, she lists
net monthly income of $3,789, monthly debt payments of $264, and monthly expenses of
$1,289. (AE B) This leaves Applicant with a monthly remainder of $2,499. (AE B) Her
5
most recent credit reports reveal no other delinquent credit balances. (GEs 2 and 5 and
AE C)
Policies
 The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
6
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate
burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant comes to these proceedings as a skilled program analyst who
struggled with her mortgages after her co-purchaser and roommate incurred child
support losses and could no longer contribute her share of the mortgage.  Ultimately,
the mortgage on her residence was foreclosed by the first mortgagee (creditor 1.a) and
sold at auction at a price, apparently enough to cover both outstanding mortgages. 
7
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accruing mortgage delinquencies
on both of her mortgages and risking potentially enforceable account deficiencies
following the public sale of her property. Applicant’s potential accrual of a deficiency on
her foreclosed first and second mortgages initially warrants the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances are present in connection with Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent balances on her two mortgages on her former residence.
deficiency balance with creditor 1.a following foreclosure of the first mortgage. The
evidence is clear that but for the unfortunate reduction of child support payments to
Applicant’s co-purchaser and roommate, Applicant would have been able to continue
managing her mortgage payments. 
Through no fault of her own, Applicant continued to struggle in meeting her
$3,500 mortgage payments throughout 2009 and 2010 without any payment assistance
from her roommate. Inability to obtain timely refinancing from her lender contributed,
too, to Applicant’s inability to avoid delinquency with her mortgages. When considered
together, these circumstances, merit application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  Financial
hardships associated with her income shortages his contributed to Applicant’s problems
with her two mortgages. 
Before her roommate ceased contributing her share of mortgage payments,
Applicant enjoyed good credit. With her reduced resources to make her mortgage
payments, Applicant struggled to stay current with her two mortgages and ultimately
defaulted on both of them. She sought assistance from her first mortgagee to no avail
and tried for several years to market her property privately (never listing the property) at
levels sufficient to pay off her two mortgages, but without success. 
Not until Applicant consulted with a local real estate agent about the possibilities
of a short sale did she learn of the public sale of the property following creditor 1.a’s
foreclosure of her residence in 2012. Ultimately, Applicant lost her home to foreclosure
and exposed herself to the potential risk of an enforceable deficiency by one or both of
her mortgagees.
8
On the important factual and legal question of whether Applicant owes any
money to either or both of the listed creditors, documented credited reports, public
records, and correspondence from the second mortgagee warrant factual inferences
and conclusions that Applicant is debt-free with these listed lenders. 
Even assuming that Applicant could be at risk to deficiency claims from either
creditor based on any mistaken findings, state law controlling foreclosure procedures in
the state of foreclosure of Applicant’s property provides jurisdictional time limits on the
filing of deficiency claims in non-judicial foreclosure proceedings (which is the case
here).  Section 33-814 of the controlling State A statutes permits an action to recover a
deficiency balance after sale or foreclosure on property, so long as the action is brought
within 90 days after the date of sale of the trust property in issue pursuant to Section 33-
807 of State A’s statutes. (HE 1)   
Based on the documentation and testimony produced (both at hearing and in
post-hearing submissions), neither creditor 1.a nor creditor 1.b-1.c filed any court claims
seeking a deficiency within the prescribed 90-day time lime for pursuing deficiency
claims. Applicant, accordingly, is free and clear of any potential legal challenges seeking
deficiencies. Applicant’s settlement efforts with creditors 1.a and 1.b-1.c entitle her to
the mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” 
With the satisfaction of the only listed debt in the SOR and her excellent credit
standing, Applicant is able to demonstrate the level of financial progress required to
meet the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to
rectify her financial condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances.
See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). 
Here, Applicant showed sustained efforts to save her property from foreclosure
before the burdens of unsuccessful attempts with her first mortgagee to modify her loan
and market her property through an approved short sale became too much to sustain.
Ultimately, though, she satisfied her mortgage debts with creditor 1.a, and with creditors
1.b-1.c. Applicant’s actions represented good faith efforts to address her mortgage
debts.  
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’s demonstrated repayment efforts
are substantial and enough to overcome security concerns associated with her 2012
foreclosure and resulting risks of deficiency enforcement. Considering all of the
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s resulting foreclosure with the potential for
deficiency enforcement, her actions taken in trying to avert foreclosure, resolve any
deficiency risk, and achieve an overall positive credit standing are sufficient to meet
mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing her finances. Favorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.c of Guideline F.
9
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                           For Applicant
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
