 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-10273 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 31, 2011, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 26, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 28, 2015. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On June 25, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 5, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
was provided to the Applicant on July 9, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on July 16, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on August 15, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted four items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 3 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on May 14, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his own 
statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In 
light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on December 10, 2015. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraph 1.a and admitted the other two 
allegations. (Items 1, 2, 4, 5)  
 
Applicant is 54 years old, married, and has one child from a former marriage. He 
also has an adult daughter from a high school romance. Applicant served in the U.S. 
Navy on active duty for three years. He works for a defense contractor and has since 
2008. (Item 2) 
 
 The first SOR allegation is that Applicant owes $17,382 on a company credit card 
he uses when he travels for the company to do work. He states in his Answer that the 
employer is responsible for paying the credit card debt after he submits his biweekly 
travel claim. Applicant claims he would not allow such a large debt to accumulate to 
jeopardize his ability to maintain his security clearance at his current age and work 
history. (Items 1, 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant admits the second allegation that he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy on 
or about March 1, 2010. He claims he is in the last month of that bankruptcy when he 
filed his Answer on February 28, 2015. He did not submit any documents when he was 
given the opportunity to do so in his Response to the FORM. The specific debts and 
arrangements of the bankruptcy were not disclosed. A discharge in bankruptcy has not 
been submitted. The credit reports in the FORM show at least $400,000 in loans and 
revolving lines of credit were included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant’s credit 
reports show a number of home mortgages, home equity, and lines of credit that were 
included later in his bankruptcy. (Items 1, 2, 4, 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant admits filing the Chapter 13 bankruptcy alleged in the third paragraph 
in December 2009. He claims it was dismissed when his attorney went to another law 
firm. Then the bankruptcy petition was refiled in March 2010. Applicant claims his 
unemployment from June to December 2008 adversely affected his ability to pay his 
debts. Applicant claims the bankruptcy action resulted from that unemployment. He has 
been employed with his present company since December 2008. (Items 1, 2, 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant’s e-QIP states he was unemployed from June to December 2008. 
Before that date and since 2008 he has been employed. (Items 2) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, 
including $17,382 on one credit card, and he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2010.. 
These two disqualifying conditions are established.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past 12 years, Applicant 
has been unemployed six months. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue. 
 
None of the other mitigating conditions apply. His financial behavior is current 
and ongoing. He has not had any financial counseling. Applicant’s financial situation 
does not appear to be under control. He has not started a good-faith effort to repay the 
$17,382 owed on his credit card. He spent so much money in the past years that he had 
to file bankruptcy to attempt to repay these debts. But he does not disclose what debts 
he entered into the Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He did not submit any evidence to show he 
disputed any of the debts. There is no allegation or evidence of affluence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2009 and refiled in 2010 to 
resolve his delinquent debts, however the status of that bankruptcy petition is 
undocumented. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the 
delinquencies. Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to 
make payments on his company credit card. If Applicant’s employer was to pay the 
credit card debt, it is reasonable to expect Applicant to notice some months earlier that 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
the debt was not being paid by the company and to take action to resolve it. He has not 
taken any action on his own to pay the debt or to have the company pay the credit card 
debt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
