1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-06885
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Reese M. Stidham, IV, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems arose, in part, through circumstances beyond his
control. However, he has not acted responsibly in response to his financial problems,
and he did not establish that he is unlikely to incur delinquent debts in the future. The
security concerns about Applicant’s financial problems are not mitigated. His request for
a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 19, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew a security clearance required for his
employment at a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 See Directive E3.1.14.3
2
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue to hold a security
clearance.  1
On May 2, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2015, and I
convened a hearing on October 22, 2015. The parties appeared as scheduled.
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5. Applicant testified and
presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) 1 - 9. He also presented one witness. A transcript of
the hearing (Tr.) was received on November 2, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that, as of the date of the SOR,
Applicant owed $36,255 for 15 past-due or delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.o). In
response, Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 1.c, and 1.f - 1.l. He admitted the
remaining allegations. Applicant also provided an explanatory statement with his
Answer. However, the Government provided sufficient information to establish the
controverted issues of fact raised by Applicant’s denials.  (Gx. 3 and 4; Tr. 91) In3
addition to the facts established by these exhibits and by Applicant’s admissions, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 42 years old and works as a senior consultant for a large defense
contractor. His position requires eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant
was hired for this job in December 2013, but did not actually start working and receiving
income until February 2014. Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from October 1993
until he retired as a technical sergeant in November 2013. He held a security clearance
throughout his military career. (Gx. 1)
Applicant was married from August 1996 until separating from his ex-wife in June
2012 and finalizing a divorce in March 2015. They have two children, ages 9 and 16.
The older child lives with Applicant while custody of the younger child is shared equally.
While deployed overseas from August 2012 until August 2013, Applicant paid his ex-
wife $815 each month for support. To finalize the divorce and child custody agreement,
he incurred legal fees for his divorce of about $18,000. He still owes his lawyer about
$6,000. As of the hearing, Applicant was engaged to be married in December 2015.
(Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 32)
3
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed a delinquent debt for a car
loan that was resolved. Applicant argues that the debt was incurred as a result of his ex-
wife’s deliberate attempts to ruin his credit. He claimed she did not pay the car loan
while he was deployed in 2012 and 2013, but Applicant was able to resolve the
delinquency and retrieve the car when he returned from Afghanistan. Applicant disputes
the validity of the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e on the basis that his ex-wife is
responsible for at least half of each debt. However, Applicant did not present any
documentation to support his claims. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2)
Applicant insists his financial problems arose from a brief period of
unemployment after he retired from the Air Force. The only income he had from
November 2013 until he started working for his current employer was his $1,200
monthly retired pay. Although Applicant was diagnosed when he left the Air Force as
suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome (PTSD), as well as service-related back
and foot disabilities, he did not receive the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
disability benefit payments to which he was entitled until April 2014. Now he receives
about $2,100 each month from the VA. When he started working for his current
employer, he was paid an annual salary of about $60,000. He now earns $63,000. After
his divorce, his retired pay was reduced to about $500 each month. His total annual
income is now about $94,000. (Tr. 27 - 29, 35 - 37, 71 - 72)
Applicant discussed his financial problems and reviewed his credit report with a
Government investigator during a subject interview on March 4, 2014. He indicated that
the past-due mortgage account (alleged at SOR 1.a) had been brought current through
an agreement with the mortgage lender. He also indicated that, although he was
unaware of many of the debts discussed during the interview, he would take action to
pay or otherwise resolve them. Eight months later, he hired a law firm that specializes in
credit information verification and resolution of credit reporting discrepancies. Applicant
pays them $30 each month, but he knows they do not provide debt repayment services.
To date, the law firm has had five accounts removed from his credit report and is
disputing or requesting information about 15 other accounts. No information was
provided showing that the law firm’s actions resolved any of the accounts listed in the
SOR. Applicant also did not present any information showing that he himself had paid or
resolved any of the SOR debts. (Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. XX; Tr. 42 - 43, 47 - 50, 54 - 57)
In 2011, Applicant took out a personal loan to repay some of the debts he owed
at that time. In 2015, he obtained from the same lender another loan for about $9,000.
He is repaying that loan at a monthly rate of $277. Applicant also received income tax
refunds in 2013 and 2014 totaling $11,000. None of that money was used to repay any
of the debts alleged in the SOR. He also continues to carry a high balance ($7,900) on
a military exchange credit card. The only financial counseling Applicant has received
consisted of mandatory pre-retirement financial training. (Tr. 58, 62, 75 - 79)
Applicant has a good reputation in the workplace and his military record was
excellent. He deployed twice to Iraq and twice to Afghanistan. In both combat zones, he
was subjected to explosions from incoming mortar rounds near the operating bases to
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
which he was assigned. He has been recognized for his service on numerous
occasions. A friend of 20 years with whom Applicant served in the Air Force commends
Applicant for his dedication and trustworthiness. He regards Applicant as a good father
and a generous friend. (Tr. 83 - 90)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
5
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record supports application of the disqualifying conditions
at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations). Applicant incurred numerous debts while he was still in
the military. His financial problems worsened after his retirement and most of his debts
remain unresolved.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
6
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies because the initial causes of his recent indebtedness
– his divorce and his lack of employment after retirement from the Air Force – will not
recur; however, his delinquencies are ongoing and he has not taken any action to
resolve them directly. His use of a credit repair law firm avoids the issue of his
responsibility for the debts he incurred. He has had sufficient income and other funds
with which to pay many of the debts listed in the SOR, yet he has not shown any
progress in that regard. He also did not explain why he waited eight months after his
subject interview to hire the credit repair law firm. Based on the foregoing, the mitigating
conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) also do not apply.
As to AG ¶ 20(c), Applicant received some financial training before he left the
military, but it does not appear to have helped him manage his personal finances in
civilian life. Finally, as to AG ¶ 20(e), Applicant claims he is disputing some of his debts,
but he did not document or fully articulate the bases of those disputes. In summary,
Applicant did not meet his burden of producing sufficient evidence to refute the SOR
allegations or to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). I note, in particular, Applicant’s military service in combat zones. The
record also reflects well on Applicant’s reputation at work. However, without sufficient
information showing good judgment in the face of his past-due debts, doubts remain
about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of
the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any lingering doubts
must be resolved against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
