 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02382 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. She is making a good-faith 
effort to resolve her delinquent accounts. To date, she has paid approximately $8,000 
toward her delinquent debts. Her eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.  
In June 2015, Applicant elected to convert to a hearing.3  On August 6, 2015, I issued a 
pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of discovery, 
the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.4  The parties complied with 
the terms of the order.5 At the hearing, convened on August 25, 2015, I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE E through I, which were 
also admitted without objection.6 I received the transcript (Tr.) on September 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, has worked for a federal contractor since November 2011. She 
seeks to obtain eligibility to occupy a public trust position because her job requires 
access to personally identifiable information (PII). On her electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP), dated December 2012, Applicant disclosed a number 
of delinquent accounts and a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. The ensuing 
investigation revealed that the Applicant owed approximately $39,300 in delinquent 
debt, including $27,000 in outstanding federal taxes, $6,000 in state tax debt, now 
$8,210 with interest, and a delinquent student loan.7 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in May 2010 when she was laid off from the 
job she held for 13 years at a telecommunications company. At the time, Applicant 
earned $26 per hour or $54,000 per year. She received a $52,000 severance package 
from her employer. Applicant did not realize that taxes were not taken out of the 
severance payment, resulting in a tax liability. Unsure about her job prospects, 
Applicant decided to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection shortly after being laid off. 
The petition was successfully discharged in May 2011. Applicant was unable to secure 
another job as quickly as she would have liked, so she decided to open her own 
business – an ice cream truck. She operated the business for 18 months and closed it 
when the gas and maintenance costs on the truck became overwhelming.8  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were also exacerbated by her living situation. In 
2012, the apartment Applicant had been renting for six years transitioned from a rent-
control property to a market-price property, resulting in a rent increase that she could 
not afford. Applicant used some of her severance money to move to another home. 
Eighteen months later, Applicant was forced to move again because her landlord was 
                                                          
3 The conversion memo is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) III. 
 
4 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as HE I.  
 
5 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
6 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE IV.  
 
7 Tr. 18; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. 20-21, 27, 21, 52. 
 
3 
 
having financial issues that ultimately forced Applicant to vacate the property. This 
move depleted her savings.9 
 
Applicant began working for her current employer through a temporary staffing 
agency in December 2011. She was hired at $14 per hour. Although it was significantly 
less money than she made at her previous job, she accepted the employment because 
she needed the steady income it provided. When she became a permanent employee in 
2012, her pay increased to $15 per hour. Since then, Applicant has been promoted 
three times and now earns $20 per hour. She also works overtime as it is offered. 
Despite the increase in income, Applicant continues to struggle to make ends meet.10 
 
Applicant is the mother of three children, ages 27, 22, and 17. Her two older 
children moved out last year, and she no longer gives them financial support. Her 
youngest child is in his senior year of high school. Applicant receives sporadic child 
support for him. At the time of the hearing, she had at least three accounts that were 30 
to 90 days past due. Despite the constraints on her income, Applicant has taken steps 
to resolve her delinquent debts. She tried to consult a credit counseling service, but 
could not afford their fees. She set up a voluntary wage garnishment of $65 each pay 
period to resolve her outstanding state tax debt. As of September 2015, Applicant paid 
down the balance from $8,210 ($6,000 plus interest) to $234. In August 2015, she 
established a payment plan of her federal taxes for $250 each month. She provided 
proof of her first payment. Applicant has challenged two debts totaling $509 with the 
creditor identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. She currently has an active account with the 
creditor and does not believe that she owes the past-due balances alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant has also rehabilitated her student loan, which is no longer in default, but in a 
forbearance status.  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”11 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”12 Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.13 An administrative judge’s 
                                                          
9 Tr. 22-23. 
 
10 Tr. 19. 
 
11 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
12 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
13 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
objective is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision that embraces all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious concern because failure to “satisfy debts 
[or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information.”14 
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
  
The record establishes the SOR allegations that Applicant owed over $39,000 in 
delinquent debts, including unpaid federal and state income taxes. The record also 
establishes that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2010.  
Accordingly, the evidence establishes the Government’s prima facie case. Applicant has 
demonstrated a history of financial problems that caused her to have an inability to pay 
her bills and income taxes.15 However, Applicant’s financial problems did not occur 
under circumstances that raise doubts about her trustworthiness. With the exception of 
her state and federal tax debts, Applicant’s financial problems were caused largely by 
events beyond her control. In 2010, Applicant was laid off from a job earning $54,000. 
Housing issues between 2012 and 2013 caused her to deplete her savings. She dealt 
with the financial repercussions of a failed business and accepted a job paying $25,000 
per year when she re-entered the workforce in 2011. Because of her federal and state 
tax liabilities, a finding that Applicant acted responsibly in light of her circumstances is 
not appropriate.16   
                                                          
14  AG ¶ 18. 
 
15 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
16 See AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 
5 
 
However, the record does support a finding that Applicant has made some good-
faith efforts to resolve her delinquent accounts. She has rehabilitated her student loan 
and it is now in a forbearance status. She reduced her state tax liability by $7,900 and 
has now turned her attention to paying off her federal tax liability. She provided a 
legitimate basis for disputing the two delinquent accounts to a creditor with whom she 
has an active and current account.17  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicants are not held to a standard of perfection. 
Although Applicant still has a significant amount of unresolved delinquent debt, her 
efforts to resolve them are not immaterial. She has provided sufficient evidence of a 
history of debt repayment and intent to resolve her delinquent accounts that she is likely 
to continue to make payments toward her debts. Accordingly, her request for access to 
sensitive information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 AG ¶¶ 20 (d) – (e).  
