 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-02408 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a trustworthiness position to work in the defense industry. Applicant filed for 
bankruptcy protection in 2006, had a vehicle repossessed, and had 28 charged-off, 
collection, or delinquent accounts, which total more than $26,000. The majority of her 
delinquent accounts were due to her and her husband’s medical problems. She 
mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct trustworthiness concerns. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
sensitive information and eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On October 6, 2014 acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
position of public trust. On November 19, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On May 27, 2015, I was assigned the case. On June 18, 2015, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a 
hearing to be convened on July 6, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A through I were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing, as did 
two others on her behalf. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documentation. Five documents were received and admitted without 
objection as Ex. J – N. The last document was received on November 16, 2015. On July 
14, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in 2004, admitted owing 20 delinquent obligations, and denied owing the 
remaining nine delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated as 
facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 2011, and seeks to obtain a position of public trust. (Tr. 21) Her monthly 
income is approximately $1,400,2 after overtime pay ended. (Tr. 29, 45) She is married, 
but her husband is not working. (Tr. 29) In February 2011, they separated for a year 
before reuniting. (Tr. 43) They have two children, ages 10 and 11. (Tr. 30) Her 
husband’s social security disability claim was denied, but is being appealed. (Ex. C, Tr. 
28) At the birth of her first child, she was confined to bed rest starting at her third month 
of pregnancy. (Tr. 30) She suffered from toxemia and preeclampsia with both 
pregnancies. (Tr. 30) Her employer’s health insurance covered the majority of the 
medical bills for her first pregnancy, and her second pregnancy was covered by 
Medicaid. (Tr. 31)  
 For the past ten years, Applicant’s husband has suffered from chronic pain from 
chronic gastritis reflux, which causes him to throw up constantly. (Tr. 31) He suffers 
from flare up or episodes. (Tr. 32) In the past ten years, he has been able to work 
approximately 40% of the time. (Tr. 43) He is being treated for pain management and 
due to his illness he has lost more than 150 pounds. (Tr. 31) He has had been 
hospitalized several times including for gall bladder surgery. (Tr. 32) He was on dialysis 
twice when his kidneys stopped functioning. (Tr. 32) The 14 SOR medical debts, which 
totaled approximately $1,300, were for her husband’s medical treatment. (Tr. 31) In 
June 2015, she paid $145 towards one of the radiology debts. Due to his illness, her 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2
 Applicant’s hourly pay rate is $15.31. (Tr. 46) 
 
3 
 
husband has been unable to maintain or keep a job. He is currently reenrolled in a two-
year school program. (Tr. 47) 
In December 2004, Applicant and her husband filed for bankruptcy protection. 
She incurred medical bills because of a complicated pregnancy. Her income stopped 
and her husband was laid off from his job. They filed for bankruptcy protection to save 
their home. (Ex. I) Their nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged in 2006. 
Following the bankruptcy, after her husband’s health had been good for six 
months, they decided to start a courier service. In August 2007, Applicant and her 
husband co-signed on the purchase of a $13,798 vehicle for their business requiring 
monthly payments of $404. (Ex. 2) Shortly after the purchase, her husband’s illness 
caused them to lose their contracts. (Ex. I) They voluntarily returned the vehicle 
resulting in an $11,979 delinquent obligation (SOR 1.b). Applicant has not had any 
recent contact with the creditor and has made no payments on the debt. (Tr. 34)  
 Applicant experienced problems with her apartment including a hole in the roof, 
water problems, and other problems. While living at the location, her mailbox was 
tampered with and credit union checks were stolen resulting in a $1,210 charged-off 
account (SOR 1.d). She asserts, due to the problems, the property manager agreed to 
allow them to end their lease early. However, a $4,185 collection account (SOR 1.c) 
was placed on Applicant’s credit record. She has disputed this debt. (Tr. 34, 35) The 
management company is no longer in business. 
In 2010, Applicant paid her jewelry account (SOR 1.s, $125) (Ex. D) She 
accepted an offer and in August 2015 and September 2015 paid a telephone bill (SOR 
1.e, $1,145) (Ex. D) She paid the credit card listed in SOR 1.y ($1,204). When she 
contacted the creditor, she was told the creditor could not locate the debt or the 
account. (Tr. 38) As of January 2013, the account appears as closed and cancelled on 
her credit report. (Tr. 39) A furniture collection account (SOR 1. aa) was included in her 
2006 bankruptcy filing. (Tr. 39) When Applicant called the city concerning the $81 water 
bill (SOR 1.bb) a delinquent account could not be located. (Tr. 40)  
In June 2010, Applicant received a speeding ticket for driving 31 miles per hour 
in a 20 miles-per-hour zone and a ticket for failing to stop at a stop sign. (Ex. 7) Each 
ticket was approximately $300. (Ex. 7) She has paid one ticket and is making payments 
on the other ticket. (Ex. F, Tr. 40, 76) It was alleged she failed to attend a court 
appearance. She asserts she went, but was unable to meet her monthly payment 
obligations. (Tr. 76) She says she was notified about the failure to pay, but was never 
issued a warrant3 for failure to appear. (Ex. 7, Tr. 76) 
Applicant and her husband sought the services of a debt management company 
and also a credit counseling service. Applicant had agreed to start making $656 monthly 
payments starting in January 2015. (Ex. A, B) However, her husband lost his job in the 
oil field. (Tr. 29) The monthly payments were based on an anticipated job, which her 
husband did not obtain. (Tr. 29) Her husband is not working.  
                                                          
3
 There is nothing in the record indicating a warrant was every issued for Applicant. 
 
4 
 
In order to save money, Applicant discontinued cable service and eating out. (Tr. 
48, 49) For the past two years, she has been living with her mother to save expenses. 
(Ex. 53) Applicant’s husband does not live with her, but lives with his mother. (Tr. 59) A 
coworker states Applicant works very hard, sometimes doing 12-hour shifts, and taking 
on other odd jobs such as catering and babysitting. (Tr. 66, 67) Applicant has gotten up 
at 4 a.m. to stand in line in order to get her children into after-school care or summer 
camps. (Tr. 66) Her friends states Applicant would do whatever she can to cut 
expenses. (Tr. 66) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. 
Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures 
contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be 
made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating 
to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a trustworthiness position. An applicant is not required 
to be debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In 2004, after losing a job due to a 
difficult pregnancy, she had to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. Following the 
bankruptcy discharge of her nonpriority unsecured debts in 2006, she had a vehicle 
repossessed and has other collection, charged-off, and delinquent accounts totaling 
more than $26,000. More than half of the debt arose from a repossessed vehicle and an 
 
6 
 
apartment lease dispute. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant provided documentation showing she paid approximately $1,500 on 
her delinquent SOR obligations. One SOR debt (SOR 1.aa, $1,177) was included in her 
previous bankruptcy. When she contacted three creditors, she was told there was no 
money owed or that accounts could not be located. Approximately half of her SOR 
debts were medical debts related to her husband’s on-going medical problems. The 
largest of her delinquent debt (SOR 1.b, $11,979) was part of a failed business venture. 
The vehicle was purchased for a courier business they were starting. The venture 
ended due to her husband’s illness and inability to continue working. The second largest 
delinquent debt (SOR 1.c, $4,185) resulted from problems with her apartment. The 
property had water problems, a hole in the roof, and other problems and the 
management company agreed the lease could be terminated early. Later, the company, 
which is no longer in business, entered a collection account against Applicant. 
  
Applicant is sole income earner for herself, her husband, who is attending school, 
and their two children. She makes $15 per hour. She has obtained other part-time jobs 
to assist her with her bills, has cancelled expenses where possible, and, two years ago, 
moved in with her mother to save money. With her limited income, she is doing what 
she can. She has acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are both multiple and many remain unpaid. She 
would like to pay her debts and entered into a debt management program in January 
2015. However, the plan was based on her husband obtaining a job in the oil industry, 
which never occurred. 
 
 Even though Applicant has been unable to address all of her debts, her failure to 
pay the debts does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. The majority of her debts were due to factors beyond her control. Her difficult 
pregnancies resulted in the loss of her job and her husband’s medical condition has 
resulted in him only being able to work 40% of the time during the last ten years. 
Additionally, starting in February 2012 she and her husband separated for a year before 
getting back together. Due to these conditions were factors beyond her control, AG & 
20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling and has not incurred any new debt. 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. The mitigating conditions 
listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the traffic tickets, and the other debts she has paid. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant failed to 
document her disputes. I find her explanation credible concerning her living conditions 
that resulted in mutual agreement to end her lease. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
In 2010, Applicant received two $300 tickets. One for traveling 31-miles-per-hour 
(MPH) in a 20 MPH zone and the other for failing to stop at a stop sign. She said she 
never received a warrant for failure to appear, but for failure to pay when she was 
unable to make her monthly payments on the tickets. These citations for traffic 
infractions and her inability to make timely monthly payments on them are insufficiently 
serious to raise trustworthiness concerns. If they did, then the mitigating condition 
outlined in AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, would apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
      
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is living with her mother 
and two children. She is doing part-time jobs to supplement her income. She makes $15 
per hour, which pays the expenses for her, her husband, and her two children. Two 
thirds of the delinquent debt was due to medical bills incurred for her and her husband’s 
medical problems, the repossessed vehicle from the failed business, and the apartment 
lease dispute. She has paid some of her bills. She has contacted some creditors and 
the creditors are unable to locate any delinquent accounts. She is doing the best she 
can.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is whether her 
financial circumstances raise trustworthiness concerns about her fitness to hold a public 
trust position. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated any questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.dd:  For Applicant   
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information and to occupy a public 
trust position is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
