 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-04817
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:  Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her financial
problems. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted.
Statement of the Case
On January 30, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Department Counsel also provided a list identifying Gx. 1 - 5. It is included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.4
2
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On January 9, 2015, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative
guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to3
the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August
26, 2015, and I convened a hearing on October 22, 2015. Department Counsel for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.)
1 - 5.  Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. DOHA received4
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $27,174 for 17
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.q). In response, Applicant denied the debts at
SOR 1.m, 1.o, and 1.q. She admitted the remaining allegations and provided an
explanatory letter with her response. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s
admissions, and based on all available information, I make the following findings of fact.
Information presented at hearing shows that the debt at SOR 1.a is the same as
the civil judgment debt at SOR 1.n. SOR 1.a is resolved for Applicant. Also, it was
established that SOR 1.m and SOR 1.p are the same debts. Accordingly, SOR 1.m is
resolved for Applicant. The total amount in controversy, therefore, is $19,358. 
Applicant is 42 years old. In December 2012, she was hired by a defense
contractor to work as a data preparation technician. In August 2014, she was promoted
to work as a customer service advocate, which at $11 an hour, is $4 an hour more than
she earned when she was hired. Applicant’s job requires she be eligible for a position of
trust because her employer supports management of the health care system used by
members of the military, and she must be found suitable to be entrusted with personally
identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care system’s constituents.
Applicant has done well and has a good reputation for reliability and hard work at her
place of employment. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 60 - 62) 
Applicant and her husband have been married since June 2011. She was also
married twice before. She has one child, now age 23, from her first marriage, which
ended in March 1996. Applicant’s second marriage began in July 2000 and ended by
divorce in January 2006. She and her second husband had two children, now ages 17
3
and 18. Both children live with Applicant. The older child is attending college. The
younger child is autistic and requires medical and related educational services at his
high school. Applicant’s second husband was often abusive, sometimes violent and
suicidal, and has not paid child support since he and Applicant separated. The only
money she receives from him are partial social security payments diverted from his own
social security benefits. Applicant had to obtain at least two protective orders against
him during the late stages of their marriage. The credit card debts alleged in the SOR
were obtained during the marriage and used primarily by her ex-husband, who had no
ability or intention of paying them. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 54 - 55)
In January 2009, Applicant was fired from a telephone marketing and sales job.
She did not meet her quota of sales over a month or two, in part, because of the
national economic slowdown. The product she sold is a discretionary purchase for most
people and demand had declined steadily starting in 2007. Also, Applicant lost time in
the workplace because her autistic child had been placed in residential care in another
state. Applicant missed more work than usual traveling to and from the facility to visit
her child, to meet with service providers, and to try to resolve child custody disputes
with the child’s father.
Applicant subsequently was unemployed until October 2009, when she started a
retail sales job. She had to leave that job in July 2010 because of the lengthy commute
at a time when gas prices were too high and she could not reconcile her work schedule
to accommodate her children’s needs. After being unemployed until October 2010,
Applicant was hired as a part-time bank teller, where she worked until her position was
eliminated in September 2012. From then until being hired for her current job, Applicant
worked in retail sales and as a stock clerk or cashier for different employers, never
making more than a minimum wage. She was unemployed between September and
November 2012, and between May and August 2013. She continued to work part-time
at a large retail store for a few months after she started her current job. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Tr. 26 - 38, 52 - 54, 57 - 61)
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed 17 delinquent or past-due
debts. Credit reports obtained during her background investigation further document all
of the debts listed in the SOR. Applicant admits that, in addition to debts she incurred as
a result of her second marriage and other unforeseen circumstances, she did not
manage her personal finances properly until about 2012, when she and her current
husband moved to the state where they now live. For example, she acknowledged that
she should not have bought the car that is the subject of the SOR 1.n repossession
debt. Despite being able to make payments on it for three years, she eventually realized
that she was incurring other debts so she could make her car payments. (Gx. 1 - 5; Tr.
33 - 35, 41 - 45)
Since 2012, Applicant and her husband have not used personal credit other than
to try and rebuild their credit score. They have a store credit card they used periodically
but only when they are able to pay it off immediately. Applicant has attended financial
management classes at work and is starting to save, albeit in small amounts, for
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 5
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 6
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 7
 Directive, 6.3.8
  “(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to9
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
4
retirement. Most of her spare income is put in a savings account for her youngest child’s
benefit. Nonetheless, they do not have the means to resolve the debts alleged in the
SOR. A financial counselor also advised them that some of the debts are so old that, if
they contacted those creditors to set up repayment plans, collection actions would be
renewed and the accounts would again be transferred among collection agencies.
Currently, none of the listed creditors are actively trying to collect their debts. Applicant
and her husband also cannot afford bankruptcy filing fees. They file and pay their taxes
on time each year. (Gx. 2; Ax. C and D; Tr. 38 - 41, 62 - 72)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In5
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also6
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.7
Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense determination based
on examination of all available relevant and material information,  and consideration of8
the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions
must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-
person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(a).  The presence or absence of a9
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against
them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility for a
position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. 
5
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect sensitive information as his or her
own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access should be
resolved in favor of the Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Aside from the duplicate debts alleged at SOR 1.a and 1.p, available information
is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts established raise a
trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG ¶ 18, as
follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG 19(a), the record is clear that Applicant’s
failure to resolve her debts is due solely to an inability to do so and not any
unwillingness on her part.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
Most of the alleged debts are still outstanding. However, the circumstances that
gave rise to those debts no longer exist. Applicant’s indebtedness no longer reflects
poor judgment or unreliability. She and her current husband are now managing their
finances soundly and have not generated any new unpaid debts. They meet all of their
regular obligations, and have started saving for retirement. Applicant has benefitted
from employer-sponsored financial counseling. He current finances are characterized by
prudent use of personal credit and an improved ability to properly manage her finances.
Based on the foregoing, the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a) - (c) apply. 
The presence of ongoing unpaid debts is not, by itself, disqualifying. Attention is
also paid to a person’s judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability in light of adverse
background information. In this case, Applicant has established that she is now
managing her finances responsibly, that the circumstances underlying her earlier
financial problems (unemployment, abusive husband, etc.) are not likely to recur, and
that her indebtedness no longer reflects adversely on her trustworthiness. On balance,
the concerns raised by Applicant’s debts is mitigated. I also have evaluated the facts
and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I also have
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶
2(a). A fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows
that Applicant is unlikely to again experience such financial problems, and that she has
the requisite good judgment and trustworthiness for a position of trust.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP eligibility
is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
