 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05329 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from 2010 to at least 
January 2014. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 5, 2014. On 
February 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2015, and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record.  
                                            
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 13, 
2015, was mailed to him the same day. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM 
on October 16, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM 
and to provide material in rebuttal, extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM or submit any information after his receipt of the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on January 21, 2016. 
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Department Counsel's submission included a summary of a personal subject 
interview on April 3, 2014. (Item 6) The summary was not authenticated as required by 
the Directive E3.1.20. Department Counsel's submission included a footnote advising 
Applicant that Item 6 was not authenticated and that failure to object to Item 6 might 
constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. However, a pro se applicant's failure to 
object to an unauthenticated personal subject interview is not tantamount to waiver of 
the authentication requirement. Waiver means "[t]he voluntary relinquishment or 
abandonment - express or implied - of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to 
have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and the 
intention of forgoing it." Black's Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., 
West 2009). The record does not reflect that Applicant understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not reflect that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of Item 6. Thus, Item 6 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegation, with explanations. His admission 
is incorporated in the findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
including his 2014 SCA (FORM, Item 5) and his answer to the SOR (Item 4), I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old electrical engineer. He graduated from high school in 
2007, and received his bachelor’s degree in June 2011. He started working with his 
current employer, a federal contractor, immediately after his college graduation. He has 
never been married and has no children. He has been residing with a cohabitant since 
September 2013. (FORM, Item 5) This is Applicant’s first security clearance application. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) of his 
2014 SCA that he illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from about 2010 to 
2014. (FORM, Item 5) He stated that he used marijuana to ease the symptoms of a 
chronic medical condition. The frequency of his marijuana use depends on the severity 
and frequency of the symptoms, up to a few times a month. He stated: 
 
 
3 
 
 
I have used marijuana as an alternative form of treatment for Crohn’s 
disease, after discovering medical studies that found it to be an effective 
treatment for this disease. Having been diagnosed at 6 years old, I had 
been treated with a variety of prescription medicines, many of which were 
immune-suppressants and came with highly unpleasant side effects. 
Specifically, having a compromised immune system led to frequent 
contraction of common illnesses. The use of marijuana has helped me 
cope with this disease and ease my dependence on medicines that 
compromised my immune system and general quality of life. (FORM, Item 
5) 
 
Applicant further stated that he is still exploring other treatments for Crohn’s 
disease, but until a better treatment can be found, he intends to continue using 
marijuana to treat his symptoms. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his use 
of marijuana was limited to evenings before going to bed. He believes that his use of 
marijuana could not be used to blackmail him or to lead him to break other laws. He 
stated that if it was clearly necessary, he could make do without it, though his health 
would suffer. (Answer to the SOR) 
 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show that his use of marijuana 
was legal or pursuant to a prescription issued by a duly qualified medical professional. 
The record is silent as to the circumstances surrounding his acquisition of marijuana, 
the extent of his contacts with his drug-using friends and associates, and whether 
Applicant is addicted to marijuana.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
 
4 
 
 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from around 2010 to at 
least 2014. He intends to continue using marijuana as an alternative form of treatment for 
Crohn’s disease. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides three potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions are raised by the facts and 
circumstances in this case. Applicant’s use of marijuana occurred frequently, it is 
ongoing, and he expressed his intent to continue using marijuana.  
 
Applicant claimed that he used marijuana as an alternative form of treatment for 
Crohn’s disease. Nevertheless, he failed to submit documentary evidence to show that 
his use of marijuana was legal or pursuant to a prescription issued by a duly qualified 
medical professional. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2011. He illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from 
2010 to at least 2014. His use of marijuana continues to raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to comply with the law, or to protect 
classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
