1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06572
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns generated by his family ties to
the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)  issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2015, admitting all of the
allegations and requesting a hearing. On September 17, 2015, the case was assigned to
me. On October 6, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
notice of hearing scheduling the case for October 22, 2015. I held the hearing as
2
scheduled and considered two Government exhibits (GE), marked as GE 1 and 2. The
transcript was received on October 30, 2015.
Ruling of Evidence
GE 2 is a brief that Department Counsel prepared in support of her contention that
Applicant’s family ties to PRC generate a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, or coercion. In support of her contention, she referenced 30 documents
prepared by U.S. agencies or commissions regarding PRC.
Upon reading the brief and reviewing Department Counsel’s source documents, I
have decided sua sponte to take administrative notice of  facts set forth in three of the
source documents,  as follows:
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on
Human Rights Practices for 2013: China (Includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and
Macau);
   HE II. U.S. Department of Defense OSD, Annual Report to Congress:
Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
China 2011 (OSD 2011 Annual Report - PRC Developments; and
HE III. Office of National Counterintelligence Executive, Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 2009-
2011, October 2011.
 
Consistent with an Appeal Board decision issued while my decision was pending (ADP
Case No. 14-0165 (App. Bd. November 3, 2015)), I have included these three
administrative notice source documents in their entirety in the case file.
 Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old married man with an adult child from a previous
marriage. He has been married to his current wife since 2014. (GE 1 at 20) He grew up
in PRC, graduating from college with a degree in agricultural machinery in 1982. After
immigrating to the United States in 1986, he earned a master’s degree in 1988 and a
Ph.D. He earned both post-graduate degrees in the field of agricultural engineering. (Tr.
14-15) 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000. (Tr. 16) For the past 18
months, he has worked as a software developer for a defense contractor. This is the first
job that he has held which requires a security clearance.
  Applicant has several relatives who are citizens and residents of PRC, including
his father, his siblings, and his father-in-law. Applicant’s father, before retiring, managed
a government-owned sugar factory. (Tr. 25) He receives a pension. Applicant last saw
Applicant made two trips to PRC that year. The first visit occurred two months before his mother’s death. (Tr.1
34) 
3
his father when he travelled to PRC to attend his mother’s funeral in 2013. (Tr. 25)1
Applicant does not e-mail his father because his father is not computer literate. (Tr. 18)
They do, however, speak during special occasions and holidays.
Applicant’s has two brothers and two sisters. His younger brother worked at the
same factory where their father worked. He retired after experiencing a disabling injury.
(Tr. 26) Applicant last saw him during a 2002 visit to PRC. They talk by phone
approximately once per year.
Applicant’s older brother is a PRC citizen who moved to Canada in 2003. Before
moving to Canada, he worked as a college teacher in PRC. (Tr. 27)  When he
immigrated to Canada, he took a job with a utility company. He has not worked since
being laid off in 2005. (Tr. 20) Applicant last visited his older brother in PRC in 2002.
Since his brother moved to Canada, Applicant has travelled to Canada twice to visit him,
and his brother has visited him in the United States twice. (Tr. 20) The number of times
they communicate annually is unknown from the record.
Applicant’s older sister worked in PRC at a factory. She is retired and receives a
pension. She lives with Applicant’s father. Applicant last saw her when he returned to
PRC for a visit in 2015. In sum, he has visited her approximately four times in PRC over
the past 30 years. They do not communicate regularly. (Tr. 21) 
Applicant’s younger sister was in middle school when Applicant immigrated to the
United States. Currently, she works at a school that provides leadership training to
government managers. (Tr. 31) It is unclear from the record whether the school where
she works is government-run. (Tr. 30-31) Applicant communicates with her
approximately once per year via text messaging. (Tr. 22) Applicant last saw her when he
visited PRC in 2013. (Tr. 21)
Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired doctor. He receives a government pension.
(Tr. 32) He is 82 years old and in poor health. The main reason that Applicant and his
wife visited PRC in July 2015 was to check on him, as he was rehabilitating from
surgery. (Tr. 22)  
Applicant’s college roommate is a citizen and resident of PRC. He is a college
professor. (Answer at 2) Applicant visited him when he travelled to PRC in 2013. He had
lost contact with this classmate after graduating from college, and decided to visit him
because he heard that he lived near his parents. (Tr. 23) After having dinner with his old
roommate, he concluded that they had little in common. He has not seen or talked to this
classmate since the 2013 visit. (Tr. 23, 33) 
Applicant has no assets in PRC. His child was born in the United States. Applicant
owns a home that is worth $900,000, and he has $560,000 invested in a 401(k)
4
retirement account. (Tr. 36) He provides no financial support to any of his relatives who
are PRC citizens. (Tr. 33) 
The PRC has an authoritarian government. (HE I at 1) Repression and coercion of
its citizens is routine. (Id.) PRC uses its intelligence services and other illicit approaches
to collect sensitive U.S. information and export-controlled technology with the goal of
diminishing the U.S technological edge in areas critical to the development of military
weapons and communications systems. (HE II at 41). PRC’s intelligence services
frequently seek to exploit persons with family ties to PRC who can use their insider
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail.
(HE III at 5) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the United States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
interest.” (AG ¶ 6) Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider
5
the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is
located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country
is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.” (Id.)
The PRC is a totalitarian country that competes with the United States for military,
technological, and financial influence worldwide. To achieve its strategic objectives, the
PRC aggressively conducts espionage against the U.S. Government and U.S.
businesses, and has a history of seeking to conduct espionage through the exploitation
of  persons with familial ties to the PRC. Consequently, Applicant’s relationship with his
father, siblings, father-in-law, and college roommate generate the application of the
following disqualifying conditions:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.
Applicant has only seen or spoken with his college roommate once in the nearly
30 years since they graduated. Although it is not inconceivable that a country that
conducts espionage as aggressively as PRC could seek to exploit Applicant through a
relative living abroad, such as his older brother who lives in Canada, it is unlikely given
how long his brother has lived abroad. AG ¶ 8(c) “contact or communication with foreign
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk
for foreign influence or exploitation,” applies to these relationships. I resolve
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.f in Applicant’s favor.
Conversely Applicant’s other family members, including his father-in-law, remain
in PRC. Although Applicant’s contacts with these relatives is casual and infrequent, he
traveled to PRC as recently as last year. Given the multifaceted and aggressive nature of
PRC’s espionage activities, I cannot conclude that the infrequency of contact minimizes
the risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to these
relationships.
Applicant has only visited PRC five times in the 30 years since immigrating to the
United States. His immediate family and his property interests are located exclusively in
the United States. These factors, though significant, are unable to overcome the heavy
burden generated by the PRC’s status as a totalitarian state with a history of oppressing
its citizens and  aggressively collecting U.S. intelligence. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1986 to attend graduate school.
Ultimately, he stayed and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 14 years later in 2000.
Although he presented no evidence of his work performance, it appears, judging by the
amount of money he has saved for retirement, that he has nurtured a highly successful
career. Given the pervasive nature of PRC’s espionage activities, its role as a strategic
competitor with the United States, and its status as a totalitarian country that does not
respect individual rights, I cannot conclude that Applicant has carried the burden.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
