 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-05588 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by a history of living 
beyond his means. Instead of paying his mortgage, taxes, and other financial 
obligations, he used his income to finance a lifestyle that he could not otherwise afford. 
He failed to establish that he has reformed the financial habits that led to concerns 
about his eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 
On March 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his conduct and circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 On March 17, 2015, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. (Answer)  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On July 1, 2015, Department Counsel indicated that the Government was ready 
to proceed to hearing. I was assigned the case on October 1, 2015, and after conferring 
with the parties, scheduled the hearing for November 17, 2015.2 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 9. Applicant testified 
and offered Ex. A – C. I granted his request for additional time post-hearing to submit 
documents in support of his case, to include documents to corroborate his testimony of 
addressing the tax-related debt referenced in SOR 1.c.3 He timely submitted Ex. D. All 
exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on November 30, 2015, and the record closed on December 11, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his late forties, is married and has three children. He is a high 
school graduate with some college-level coursework to his credit. He served in the U.S. 
military from 1985 to 1991, receiving an honorable discharge. He has worked as a 
federal contractor for the past 25 years, with no reported periods of unemployment. 
Currently, he is a senior information technology engineer. He initially received a security 
clearance in 1991 and, as part of the periodic reinvestigation of his background, 
submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2014. (Tr. at 8, 25-28; Ex. 1) 
 
On his SCA, Applicant disclosed two past-due debts, a delinquent mortgage and 
a judgment. The two debts total over $300,000. At hearing, Applicant explained that his 
financial problems began in about 2001. He had recently gotten married and assumed 
$30,000 in past-due debt that his wife incurred prior to the marriage. Shortly thereafter, 
his house started having structural issues. Applicant estimates he spent about $65,000 
trying to fix the home and bring it up to code. He financed the construction cost by 
refinancing the mortgage on his former home. He had purchased the home for 
approximately $144,000 in 1996, and by the time he submitted the SCA in 2014, the 
mortgage balance had increased to about $309,000. (Tr. at 29-44, Ex. 1 at 33-34) 
 
Applicant attempted to renegotiate the terms of the mortgage, but was 
unsuccessful. In 2008, he stopped paying the mortgage to improve his negotiating 
position with the lender. He used the money to pay for his son’s college, satisfy the 
debts his wife incurred prior to their marriage, and to purchase several vehicles. (Tr. at 
29-44, 54-66) At one point, Applicant had seven motorcycles. (Tr. at 63)  
 
The judgment Applicant listed on the SCA is for the remainder owed on a leased 
vehicle. Applicant was involved in a car accident in 2008 that resulted in the leased 
vehicle being totaled. The creditor secured a judgment against him in 2011 for the 
remainder owed on the contract. (Tr. at 51-54; Ex. 8) Applicant testified as follows 
regarding the circumstances leading to the judgment: 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, scheduling correspondence, notice of hearing, and case management 
order. See also, Hx. II, documents establishing that, at the time of the hearing, Applicant was being 
sponsored for a clearance. 
 
3 See Tr. at 66-68. 
 
3 
 
Applicant: . . . in 2007, I bought the brand new Dodge Avenger that came 
out, the R-2 model. It was fine from (sic), nice car, it had everything laid 
out into the car, had the DVD systems so my daughter can sit in the back 
and relax. Nice car. Not beyond my means. Payments were fine. I rolled 
the car on its side in 2008. The company asked me if my insurance 
company paid off the damages to the car and everything is paid off the car 
in full. Apparently, they wanted the rest of the contract on lease contract. I 
said if the insurance paid off the car, why am I paying off the rest of the 
lease contract? Apparently, they can go to court and say if you don’t show 
up, then yes, you miss the court date, you go, they judge against you. 
That is where we were with that. I have been fighting that, trying to appeal 
and I have been denied every appeal I turned up. 
 
Department Counsel: So you lost the default judgment? 
 
Applicant: Yes, I did. 
 
(Tr. at 52-53) 
 
 In late August 2015, Applicant resolved the past-due mortgage and the judgment 
through a short-sale of his former home. (Ex. A; Ex. B) These debts are referenced in 
SOR 1.a and 1.b. Both debts are resolved, as are the $265 in traffic tickets referenced 
in SOR 1.d and 1.e. (Answer) 
 
The SOR also lists a $6,400 judgment lien for past-due state taxes from 2009 
(SOR 1.c). Applicant explained that in 2009, he switched his employment designation 
from a salaried employee to an independent contractor. He did not save a sufficient 
amount of his income to pay his federal or state taxes. In 2010, a judgment lien was 
entered against him for the past-due state taxes. (Tr. at 44-51, 66-68; Ex. 6)  
 
Applicant testified that he became aware of the overdue state taxes in about 
2012. (Tr. at 51, 67) But, on his 2014 SCA, Applicant denied having any liens or 
judgments for failing to pay his taxes. (Ex. 1 at 33-35)4 
 
In his Answer, Applicant states that he started to repay the state tax debt, but 
stopped paying it to help his son pay for college. At hearing, Applicant testified that he 
restarted payments on the state tax debt. (Tr. at 66-68) He did not present any 
documentation at hearing or post-hearing to corroborate his testimony that he was 
resolving the state tax debt. The state tax debt, SOR 1.c, remains unresolved.5 
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. His net monthly income is 
approximately $6,800. He testified about out-of-pocket medical expenses for his wife’s 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s apparent falsification of the SCA was not alleged and is only being considered in assessing 
his mitigation case and whole-person factors.  
 
5 The record does contain information that Applicant resolved a separate state tax lien for over $1,800 in 
2014. (Compare, Ex. 5 at 1, with, Ex. 7) 
 
4 
 
debilitating illness. He also discussed some of the steps he has taken to reduce his 
expenses, including downsizing to a smaller home that he co-owns with his mother. (Tr. 
at 54-66) Notwithstanding these efforts, Applicant testified that he is still essentially 
“broke.” (Tr. at 54) He did not provide documentation regarding his current finances.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely, and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were primarily caused by his inability to live within 
his means. Instead of paying his mortgage, taxes, and other financial obligations, he 
used his income to finance a lifestyle that he could not otherwise afford. Accordingly, 
the record evidence raises the financial considerations security concern and the 
following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated 
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income 
ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The mitigating conditions that are potentially relevant in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(d) for resolving four of the SOR 
debts. He also receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b), because the structural issues 
that afflicted his former home and his wife’s medical issues were matters beyond his 
control. However, he did not meet his burden in establishing the full applicability of 
either of these mitigating conditions or any of the other mitigating conditions, as more 
fully explained below.  
 
 First, for several years, Applicant refused to pay a judgment entered against him. 
The fortuitous circumstance under which the judgment was recently satisfied does not 
mitigate the serious security concerns raised by his failure to pay the judgment. 
 
 Second, even after being provided ample opportunity to provide documentation 
to corroborate his testimony that he was addressing the past-due state tax debt, he 
failed to provide such evidence. Applicants for a security clearance are expected to 
present documentation to corroborate their claims of debt resolution. ISCR Case 07-
10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008). Applicant’s failure to provide such documentation 
and evidence regarding the current state of his finances raises unresolved questions 
about whether he presently manages his finances in a responsible manner. 
 
 Third, although Applicant’s desire to help his children attain a college education 
is both understandable and laudable, he was only able to achieve his personal goals by 
neglecting his other financial obligations. Of note, Applicant stopped paying his 
mortgage in 2008 and has yet to resolve past-due state taxes from 2009. This record 
evidence raises concerns that Applicant may similarly neglect his security obligations if 
it poses a conflict with his personal goals, desires, or interests. 
 
 A security clearance determination is not a debt collection process. Instead, it is 
intended to evaluate whether an individual holds the judgment, reliability, and other 
pertinent character traits required of those granted access to this nation’s secrets.6 
Applicant failed to mitigate the serious security concerns raised by a history of living 
beyond his means. He has not received financial counseling, or submitted sufficient 
evidence of genuine financial reform. In light of Applicant’s history of financial 
irresponsibility and lack of sufficient evidence of financial reform, I am not convinced 
that similar financial issues are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s finances continue to raise 
questions about his suitability for access to classified information.7  
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 13-00311 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 24, 2014) (“In a Guideline F case, a Judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s financial condition for what it may reveal about the applicant’s self-control, judgment, and 
other pertinent qualities.”). See also, ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).  
 
7 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13984 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014) (notwithstanding evidence that individual 
satisfied SOR debts, adverse decision sustained because s/he did not mitigate security concerns raised 
by a history of financial issues). See also, ISCR Case No. 14-04300 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 30, 2015) (Board 
sustains adverse decision because individual did not produce “sufficient evidence to establish an 
improvement in financial health, habits, or practices.”) 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I hereby incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s past military service and years of work on 
behalf of the U.S. Government as a federal contractor. Furthermore, I took into account 
that he has held a security clearance for years without apparent issue, other than those 
listed in the SOR. However, he has a lengthy history of placing his personal financial 
interests above his legal financial obligations, to include the obligation of all citizens to 
pay their taxes. After considering and weighing all the evidence, both favorable and 
unfavorable, I find that Applicant’s financial situation continues to raise a security 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about his eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
