 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06040 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines G, alcohol consumption, and J, criminal conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On October 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On November 20, 2015, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on December 9, 2015. Applicant 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and 
Items 2 through 13 are admitted into evidence. Applicant provided additional information 
that is marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D. The Government had no 
objection and the exhibits are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
January 21, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations. I have incorporated 
his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has not served in the 
military. He married in 1997. He has no children. He has worked for federal contractors 
since 2002 and his present employer since 2013.1 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 1991 and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI). He received 12 months of probation before judgment. In 
Applicant’s sworn statement from May 2003, he admitted he had consumed seven 
drinks before driving. He stated that he had learned his lesson from that incident and did 
not drink and drive for years.2 
 
 In May 1998 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated. 
He entered into a plea bargain and the charge was changed to DUI. His license was 
suspended for six months. He was required to pay court costs and fines, serve 18 
months probation, and he was ordered to attend alcohol counseling. In his sworn 
statement, Applicant stated he consumed 12 beers over a three-hour period, then went 
to a bar and consumed 3 more beers over a 45-minute period. He was aware he was 
intoxicated and should not drive, but decided to because his house was close. He lost 
control of his vehicle. His breathalyzer result was .20%. He completed the terms of his 
sentence, including a 26-week outpatient alcohol treatment program. There is no 
information if he received a diagnosis by a licensed professional. Applicant indicated in 
his statement that he is not an alcoholic and that he learned a lot from this mistake. He 
indicated he did not intend to drink and drive in the future. He explained the 1991 
alcohol-related incident only taught him a lesson for a few years because he did not 
suffer many ramifications for his actions. He stated he did not consume alcohol for 18 
months after this incident. He also stated his probation officer suggested it was a good 
idea to abstain from alcohol consumption while on probation.  
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 9. 
 
3 
 
 
In his 2003 statement, Applicant indicated he never used alcohol at work and it 
had not caused him any problems. He did not believe he had a problem with alcohol, he 
no longer involved himself in that type of behavior, and he never engaged in 
embarrassing or disgraceful actions. He explained he had never been diagnosed by a 
professional. He stated he continued to consume three to five beers twice a week.3  
 
 In January 2013, while on a work-related trip, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with resisting arrest and assault. According to the police report, Applicant was 
heavily intoxicated while at a club. He refused to pay for services provided. He was told 
to leave the club and then became belligerent. He told the bouncer that he forgot his 
coat, and he was permitted to go back inside the club to retrieve it. He could not locate 
the coat, and he was again told to leave the club and was escorted off the property by 
the bouncer. Upon getting to the main lobby he again became belligerent and refused to 
leave. He then struck the bouncer in the left side of his face with a closed fist. Applicant 
was then wrestled to the floor and held down. The police arrived approximately a minute 
later. The bouncer’s statement was corroborated by the manager’s statement.  
 
 Applicant reported the incident to his supervisor and disclosed the following. He 
indicated he had been at an unknown bar or nightclub. He believed there were four 
other people involved in the incident, who may have been police officers. He began 
drinking alone around 5:00 p.m. and recalled going to three bars. He admitted he was 
drinking heavily with a mixture of beer and whiskey. He remembered getting a cab and 
going to another bar, but the rest of the night is blurry, and he blacked out. He vaguely 
recalled being handcuffed, getting into a vehicle, and being in a jail cell. He had no idea 
why he was there. He recalled that sometime later he was escorted to a larger holding 
area with inmates, where he stayed for several hours. In the morning, he was brought 
before a judge via video and learned he was involved in a physical altercation with 
police, and he had punched one of them. He made no statement. His wife posted bail 
and he was released. He was in pain and later learned he had broken ribs, an injured 
elbow, and cuts and bruises. He hired an attorney, who represented him at the 
proceedings. His case was continued for several months. The judge later ruled if he 
stayed out of trouble for a period of time and made a $1,000 donation to the local food 
bank, the charges would be dismissed. The charges were later dismissed after he 
provided proof of his donation and good conduct.4 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM regarding his 2013 arrest for assault and 
resisting arrest, he stated that he was going through a stressful time, was away from 
home, and unfortunately chose to binge on alcohol. He stated:  
 
The incident resulted in an arrest for assault, but I feel this was in major 
part due to my treatment at the hands of the bouncers at the nightclub I 
was in. I would not, nor have I ever assaulted another person without 
being in a situation of self-defense. I felt I was being unfairly targeted and I 
                                                          
3 Item 9. 
 
4 Item 12; AE C, D. 
 
4 
 
 
was under attack, so I responded with force. Let it be known, as I was 
charged also for resisting arrest, this was my result of being unable to 
breathe as I had been face-down on the floor with weight on my back and 
hands obstructed. I did not strike an officer, as I incorrectly stated at the 
time of the interview. The police report will show that fact.5 
 
This statement contradicts Applicant’s report to his supervisor that he blacked out and 
could not recall what happened at the time of the incident. 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in October 2013. In 
response to question 24 that asked if, in the past seven years, alcohol had a negative 
impact on his work performance, professional or personal relationships, finances, or 
resulted in intervention by law enforcement or public safety personnel, Applicant 
answered “yes” it had from October 2012 to February 2013.6 He disclosed:  
 
October 2012-excessive drinking while on business travel. Was late for 
work and admitted to my boss the situation. Jan[uary] 30, 2013-excessive 
drinking while on business travel-contributed to my behavior which 
resulted in my arrest.7  
 
He further disclosed that the negative impact alcohol had on him included poor 
performance at work and his arrest due to drinking alcohol. He admitted he was drinking 
too much at the time and it also caused a strained relationship with his wife.8  
 
 Applicant voluntarily participated in counseling from February 2013 to August 
2013. He indicated he wanted to show he could stop drinking. He stated he did not 
consume alcohol from February 2013 to June 2013. He attended group sessions, but he 
did not participate in individual counseling. He indicated he successfully completed the 
program, which included attending some Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. No 
information was provided as to whether he received a diagnosis or a prognosis by a 
professional.9 In his background interview, Applicant stated that he attended this 
treatment for depression and not due to any alcohol issue.10 This contradicted his 
response to the FORM in which he said he mitigated the issues raised by his alcohol 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2.  
 
9 Item 6. 
 
10 Item 6; AE C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
consumption through attendance at a counseling program and some Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings.11 
 
During his background interview in January 2014, Applicant indicated that he 
began drinking alcohol when he was about 19 years old. He would consume about six 
beers per sitting every weekend. In 2012 he began drinking liquor because it was more 
fun. He had three to four drinks twice a week. He confirmed that he continued to 
consume alcohol.12 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he argued that the three alcohol-related 
incidents are not related because significant time had passed between them, such that 
they are isolated incidents. The first occurred when he was 23 years old and 
irresponsible. The second occurred when he was 30 and deterred him from future drunk 
driving. The third incident, which involved an arrest for assault and resisting arrest, 
occurred when he was 45 years old, and it was a learning experience for him.13 He 
stated: 
 
The three alcohol-related incidents happened at different times in my life, 
each separated by 7 and 15 years in between. As of this writing, I believe 
my quality of life has never been better. As I have learned after my 2nd 
incident to not drink and drive, and it is the final incident that has given me 
perspective to change my life and to never be in the position of trouble 
with the law for the remainder of my life.14 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant confirmed he continues to consume alcohol, 
but changed his mentality about drinking and no longer binges on alcohol. He explained 
he is able to abstain from alcohol consumption for weeks and months. He believes that 
except for the three alcohol-related incidents he has had a positive career and has been 
a trusted advisor to the federal government as a contractor.15  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
11 AE C. 
 
12 Item 6. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
14 AE A. 
 
15 AE A, B. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
7 
 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant has been arrested three times for alcohol-related incidents. He was 
charged with DUI in 1991. He was charged with driving while intoxicated in 1998, and 
the charge was reduced to DUI. He was charged with assault and resisting arrest in 
2013 while on business travel for his job. The last incident occurred when he was binge 
drinking and blacked out. I find AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser”); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant has been involved in three serious alcohol-related incidents over a 22-
year-period. After his first DUI arrest in 1991, he indicated he learned his lesson and did 
not drink and drive for years. After the second DUI in 1998, he stated he had learned a 
lot from this mistake and did not intend on drinking and driving in the future. He 
explained that the 1991 DUI only taught him a lesson for a few years because he did 
not suffer many legal ramifications for his actions. Regarding the 2013 incident, 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant admitted he was binge drinking. He told his supervisor he blacked out and 
could not remember what happened. In his response to the FORM, he said he was 
provoked by the bouncer at the club and acted in self-defense. His contradictions raise 
concerns. Although there is a significant period of time between each incident, there is 
also a pattern. Applicant participated in group counseling, but he first indicated it was 
not for his alcohol abuse, but was rather for depression. He provided evidence that he 
attended AA, which was part of the counseling program. I am not convinced that 
Applicant’s past alcohol-related conduct happened under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur, because they have recurred, albeit over a period of years. His 
comment that he only learned a lesson for a few years raises the question as to how 
long the 2013 incident will have an impact on him. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on 
his good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I find AG ¶ 22(a) and 22(d) do not 
apply. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that alcohol had a negative effect on him, but he 
believes he has resolved his issues. He indicated he abstained from consumption for a 
period of time to prove he could abstain. He attended group counseling and some AA 
meetings. He continues to consume alcohol, and there is no evidence that he has been 
involved in an incident since 2013. AG ¶ 22(b) provides some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
31, and the following potentially apply: 
  
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
 Applicant has been arrested three times for alcohol-related criminal conduct in 
1991, 1998, and 2013. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
9 
 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct spans a 22-year-period. The analysis under 
Guideline G, alcohol consumption, also applies under Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
Until Applicant’s alcohol issues are resolved, I am not confident that his criminal 
behavior is unlikely to recur. At this juncture, I find his past criminal conduct casts doubt 
on his good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I find AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. 
There is some evidence that Applicant is remorseful for his conduct and he indicated he 
has a good employment record. I find AG ¶ 32(d) has some application. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has been married to his wife since 1997. He has 
worked for federal contractors since 2002. He has been involved in three alcohol-related 
incidents since 1991. The last one occurred in 2013 when he blacked out and was 
arrested for assault and resisting arrest. After each of the three incidents, Applicant 
acknowledged his mistakes and indicated he had learned his lesson. He participated in 
two counseling programs. Although a significant period of time had passed between 
each, there is a recurring pattern of alcohol-related incidents resulting in criminal 
charges. Some mitigation was provided to show that Applicant participated in group 
 
10 
 
 
counseling, but there is conflicting information about the purpose of his participation. 
Initially Applicant indicated that the counseling was for his depression, and later stated it 
was related to the alcohol incident. This is relevant because there is insufficient 
information to determine whether his issues with alcohol were adequately addressed. 
Although there is some evidence of mitigation, it is insufficient because Applicant has 
continued to periodically consume alcohol to the point of impairment over the years, 
which is concerning. Without credible and independent evidence to corroborate his 
assertions that he has gained insight into the behaviors which underlie the three 
alcohol-related instances, I remain unconvinced that similar incidents will not recur. 
Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline G, alcohol consumption and Guideline J, criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
