 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-05658  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant remains indebted to 14 creditors in an approximate amount of $76,000. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 15, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On April 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 14, 2015 (Answer), and requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 4.) On September 8, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 17, 2015, and received by her on 
September 25, 2015. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. She timely submitted an exhibit that I marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel.  
Applicant did not submit any objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on November 9, 
2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer Applicant admitted 3 of the 14 allegations contained in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR: 1.a ($41,229); 1.h ($2,677); and 1.o ($11,808). She denied the remaining 
debts.1 (Item 2.) Her admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and unmarried. She has an adult child. She earned 
some college credits. Since 2003 she has worked for federal contractors. She is a staff 
analyst. (Item 4.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from August 2014 and August 2013, the 
SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts, which totaled $76,362, and included a delinquent 
mortgage and two judgments. The debts became delinquent between 2007 and 2013. 
(Items 5, 6.) In her Answer, Applicant stated that she was in the process of hiring a 
lawyer to resolve the mortgage and an automobile repossession. She said she is 
making monthly payments on a judgment. She denied the remaining debts because 
they were paid, were duplicates, or were not her debts. (Item 2; AE A.) She provided no 
evidence to corroborate any of those assertions.  
 
 Applicant stated that her mortgage problems arose because the house she 
purchased needed substantial work of which she was unaware at the time of the sale. 
The automobile she purchased broke down soon after she bought it, and she could not 
afford the repairs or payments. The car was subsequently repossessed. (Item 2.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
                                                 
1
 The SOR does not contain an allegation 1.d. 
 
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debt. From 2007 to 2013, she accumulated 
14 delinquent accounts totaling over $76,000. That ongoing pattern of delinquent debt, 
and history of inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raise security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
                                                 
2
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to produce sufficient evidence that she addressed any of her 
delinquent accounts. She offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of 
debt resolution. She provided some evidence that certain delinquencies were caused by 
conditions beyond her control; but she failed to submit documentation indicating that 
she acted responsibly under those circumstances. She presented no evidence of 
financial counseling. There are no clear indications that her financial problems are being 
resolved in good faith, or are under control. She did not formally dispute any of the 
SOR-listed debts. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under any 
of the foregoing provisions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for her voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security 
concerns expressed in the SOR. Her SOR-listed delinquent debts arose between 2007 
and 2013, and appear to remain unresolved despite her employment by a government 
contractor since 2003. She provided no evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, 
better judgment, or responsible conduct in other areas of her life to offset resulting 
 
 
6 
 
 
security concerns. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from her financial 
situation remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. She did not meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from her financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
