 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05166 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and alcohol consumption 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and G (alcohol consumption). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 25, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 12, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 7, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
submitted an e-mail and an attached document, which were marked Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A and B, and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on December 22, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2012. He served in the U.S. military from 2004 until 
he was honorably discharged in 2010. He deployed four times while in the military. He 
attended college for a period, but he has not earned a degree. He is divorced without 
children, but the woman he is cohabitating with has two children.1 
 
Applicant was arrested in March 2009 and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol. His blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was about .08%. He 
pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of reckless driving. He received a fine, probation for 
three years, and he was ordered to attend substance abuse classes. He also received 
nonjudicial punishment in the military for his conduct. Applicant stated that he was 
assisting a fellow service member who had too much to drink.2 
 
Applicant was still on probation in March 2012 when he was arrested and 
charged with DUI. His BAC was about .12%. He pleaded guilty to DUI. He was 
sentenced to a fine, 96 hours confinement, 10 days of public service, probation for 5 
years, and he was ordered to attend an 18-month multiple-conviction program. 
Applicant completed all the requirements of his probation. In January 2016, his attorney 
petitioned the court to terminate Applicant’s probation early. The attorney noted that he 
believed the motion would be granted.3 
 
Applicant admitted that he should not have been driving after drinking. He stated 
that his first conviction did not deter him because the punishment was not severe. He 
stated that the second arrest and conviction opened his eyes, and he asserted that his 
alcohol-related criminal conduct will not be repeated. He stated that he continues to 
drink responsibly, but he does not drink and drive.4 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $25,061. The debts are 
substantiated by credit reports and Applicant’s admissions.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 46-48, 54-60; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 13-14, 20-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 14, 22-28, 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-28; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that he made some payments toward the $3,050 delinquent 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but not within the last six months. He stated that he believed 
the balance had been reduced to about $2,600. He did not provide any supporting 
documentation. A credit report from August 31, 2015, listed the debt with a balance of 
$3,050.6 
 
 In his June 2015 response to the SOR, Applicant wrote that he had a $100 
payment plan for the $520 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He testified that his payment plan 
was $105 every three months and that he made one payment, reducing the balance to 
$416. He did not provide any supporting documentation, but the August 2015 credit 
report shows the date of last payment as June 2015 and a balance of $416.7 
 
 Applicant stated that he paid the $1,096 delinquent debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) to a 
collection company on behalf of a telecommunications company in 2014. He did not 
provide any supporting documentation. The debt is listed by Experian on the December 
2012 combined credit report. The date of last action is reported as October 2012. The 
debt is reported by Equifax in the September 2014 and February 2015 credit reports. 
The date of last action is reported as April 2008, and the reports carry the annotation: 
“Consumer disputes this account information.” The debt is not listed on the August 2015 
Equifax credit report.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a deficiency balance of $17,462 on a car loan after the car 
was repossessed in 2009. Applicant stated that his mother was supposed to make the 
loan payments from his account while he was deployed. He found out after he returned 
from deployment that she had not made the payments for several months, and the car 
had been repossessed. Applicant stated that he made payments toward the deficiency 
for about a year after the car was repossessed, but then he stopped. He did not provide 
any supporting documentation.9 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $2,933 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The 
debt is unresolved. He stated that he plans to pay all his delinquent debts. He attributed 
his financial problems to being unemployed for about 18 months after he was 
discharged from the military. Applicant owes federal income taxes from tax year 2014. 
He stated that he established a payment plan of $87 per month toward a tax debt of 
about $1,652. He stated that he will likely owe the IRS for tax year 2015. He has not 
received financial counseling.10 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 28-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 33-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
9 Tr. at 37-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3-6. 
 
10 Tr. at 44-52, 58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. The unpaid taxes were not alleged in the SOR. 
Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used 
in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the 
whole-person analysis. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents and arrests. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) 
are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related arrest was in March 2012. He completed 
alcohol classes. He is still on probation or recently discharged from probation. He has 
never been diagnosed as alcohol dependent, so complete abstinence is not required. 
He stated that he now drinks in moderation, and he does not drink and drive. However, 
Applicant did not learn from his first arrest. His second arrest occurred while on 
probation. There are no mitigating conditions sufficiently applicable to dispel security 
concerns about Applicant’s alcohol use.   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant was unemployed for a period, and his mother did not pay his car loan 
while he was deployed. Those events were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
Applicant established that he paid $105 toward one debt, and the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c is not listed on the most recent credit report in evidence. It may have been 
paid, as Applicant stated, or it may have fallen off his credit report due to age. Applicant 
did not submit documentary evidence of any other payments. His finances are not 
significantly improving, as evidenced by his failure to pay his taxes when they were due. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite 
the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, and particularly his 
deployments. However, he was arrested for DUI while still on probation for an alcohol-
related offense, and he has unresolved financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations and alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
