 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04461    
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Noel, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were not 
caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. She is making a good-faith 
effort to resolve her delinquent accounts and presented a legitimate basis for 
challenging several of the alleged delinquent debts. Her eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
 
2 
 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On August 6, 
2015, I issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and 
submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  
The parties complied with the terms of the order.3 At the hearing, convened on August 
25, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on September 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 27, has worked for a federal contractor since January 2014. Initially 
hired through a temporary staffing agency, Applicant became a permanent employee of 
the federal contracting company in February 2015. Applicant’s positon requires access 
to personally identifiable information (PII). On her electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP), dated February 2014, Applicant disclosed that she 
failed to pay federal income taxes for the years 2008 to 2012, that a state agency 
secured a judgment against her, and five delinquent accounts. The ensuing 
investigation confirmed Applicant’s disclosures. Ultimately, the SOR alleges that 
Applicant owes $20,600 in delinquent debts.4 
 
 The majority of Applicant’s financial problems occurred when she was between 
the ages of 18 and 20. Applicant lived with her mother until 2006 when her mother died. 
She was 47 years old. Applicant moved into her own apartment, but relied on her father 
for financial help. He died in 2008 at 41 years old. Applicant, who was pregnant with her 
first child, could no longer afford the apartment and moved without providing the 
required notice. As a result, she incurred a $1,481 debt to the apartment complex. (SOR 
¶ 1.f)  Applicant also voluntarily surrendered the car she had recently purchased with 
her father as the guarantor. That action resulted in a $3,000 deficiency balance on her 
auto loan. (SOR ¶ 1.g)5 
 
 From 2007 to 2012, Applicant worked as a child care provider for her sister’s 
children. She was paid through a municipal program. However, at 20 years old, 
Applicant did not understand that she was considered an independent contractor and 
that federal income taxes were not withheld from her pay. After receiving the SOR in 
February 2015, Applicant contacted the IRS. In addition to the $11,373 she owed in 
outstanding federal taxes (SOR ¶ 1.b), she learned that a clerical error on her 2008 and 
2009 tax returns resulted in an additional tax liability. Applicant filed amended returns in 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015 is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 Tr. 14-15; GE 1 -4. 
 
5 Tr. 16-17, 27-28.  
 
 
3 
 
May 2015 and is waiting to hear from the IRS about her adjusted federal tax liability so 
that she can make payment arrangements.6 
 
 In 2012, Applicant became pregnant with her second child. She stopped working 
and returned to school full-time. She supported herself and child with unemployment 
compensation and a small monthly payment from her father’s pension. She earned her 
associate’s degree in January 2014. After she returned to full-time employment, she 
learned that the state overpaid her unemployment compensation benefits, resulting in a 
$2,725 judgment against her. (SOR ¶ 1.a) When she made inquiries with the state 
agency about repaying the overpayment, she was informed that the account was too old 
for the agency to accept a payment plan. 7 
  
 To date, Applicant has paid five accounts, SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, 1.l, 1.j. 1.n, totaling 
$1,200. She has also successfully challenged the seven medical debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.k – 1.m, 1.o – 1.p, totaling $872, and they have been deleted from her 
credit report. She has been in contact with the IRS and in the process of resolving her 
federal tax liability. She contacted the creditor to resolve the outstanding account owed 
to the apartment complex (SOR ¶ 1.f), but they refused to accept a payment plan. She 
has not taken any steps to resolve the auto loan deficiency balance alleged in SOR 
1.g.8 
 
 Applicant currently earns $ 16.58 per hour. She is the only source of income for 
her household, which includes her boyfriend and her two children. Applicant’s boyfriend, 
with whom she has lived for eight years and is the father of her youngest child, has not 
worked since 2010. Applicant does not receive child support for either child. After 
paying her recurring bills, Applicant has approximately $ 400 in disposable income. She 
plans to continue to resolve her delinquent accounts as she is able.9  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”10 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the national interests.”11 Department of Defense contractor personnel 
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
                                                          
6Tr. 18, 28-29, 36-39.  
 
7 Tr. 24-26. 
 
8  Tr. 19-23, 26-27, 30-32; GE 5. 
 
9 Tr. 23-24, 33. 
 
10 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
11 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
 
4 
 
unfavorable access determination may be made.12 An administrative judge’s objective is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious concern because failure to “satisfy debts 
[or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information.”13 
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
  
Applicant admits that she is indebted to 16 creditors for approximately $ 20,600. 
Applicant’s admissions as well as the credit reports in the record establish the 
Government’s prima facie case. Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay her bills, 
including $11,000 in federal income taxes, and a history of financial problems resulting 
in unresolved delinquent debts.14 However, Applicant has submitted sufficient 
information to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by her finances.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems did not occur under circumstances that raise 
doubts about her trustworthiness, but began after the deaths of her parents just as she 
was transitioning into adulthood.  Her federal tax liability was not incurred as a result of 
irresponsible or avoidant behavior, but through a misunderstanding of her employment 
                                                          
12 See Regulation ¶C8.2.1. 
 
13  AG ¶ 18. 
 
14 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
status. Although she does not have a payment plan in place with the IRS, Applicant has 
taken definitive steps toward doing so. Now, earning less than $ 35,000 annually, she is 
solely responsible for a family of four. Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve 
her delinquent debt. With only $400 in disposable income each month, Applicant has 
managed to resolve $1,200 in delinquent accounts. She also successfully challenged 
the seven medical debts alleged in the SOR.15  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicants are not held to a standard of perfection. 
Although Applicant still has a significant amount of unresolved delinquent debt, her 
efforts to resolve them are not immaterial. She has established a history of debt 
repayment and shown her intent to resolve her delinquent accounts. Given this record, it 
is likely that Applicant will to continue to make payments toward her delinquent 
accounts. Accordingly, her request for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶¶ 20 (d) – (e). 
 
