 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03569 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s wife’s illness and his period of unemployment contributed to his 
financial problems. Notwithstanding, he failed to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility and clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem. 
Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 26, 2013. On 
October 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant’s attorney entered his appearance on 
November 7, 2014. Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2014, and 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on June 8, 2015, and reassigned to me on September 11, 2015. 
 
On June 23, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for September 11, 2015. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered six exhibits into evidence 
(GE 1-6), and Applicant offered 23 exhibits into evidence (AE A through W). All exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.g, and 1.j through 1.l. He denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 
1.i, because the alleged debts were paid. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old software systems engineer working for a federal 
contractor. He attended high school in the United States in 1986, as an exchange 
student and returned to his country. He returned to the United States in 1989, under a 
college student visa. Applicant received a U.S. bachelor’s degree in aerospace 
engineering in 1993. He also completed most of his master’s degree requirements, 
except for the thesis, which he never completed. After college, he remained in the 
United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001. 
 
Applicant met his wife while they were in college, and they married in 1994. After 
completing two years of college, she worked as an account executive for a 
telecommunications company for about six and one-half years. She stopped working for 
some time after the birth of their first daughter in October 2000. Applicant and his wife 
purchased a home in June 2002, and their second daughter was born in July 2002.  
 
Applicant started working for private companies after he finished college in 1993. 
Between September 2001 and March 2010, he was self-employed as an independent 
contractor, and worked as a subcontractor for a federal contractor. Applicant was 
granted access to classified information at the secret level in 2003. He also worked for a 
federal contractor from 2010 to September 2013. He was laid off in September 2013, 
and remained unemployed until March 2014, when he was hired by his current 
employer, a federal contractor. His current job is contingent on his eligibility to possess 
a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s wife had serious medical problems during the pregnancy and after 
the birth of their second daughter in 2002, and she became almost disabled. She 
suffered from a brain blood clot, seizures, gastritis, esophagitis, ulcerative colitis, 
bladder problems in 2004, sinus surgery in 2007, and a colostomy in 2008. (AE H, I) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s wife was unable to take care of herself or her children between 2002 
and 2010. Her parents and other relatives had to come in and live with Applicant for 
extended periods to assist with her and the children’s care. Applicant had to reduce his 
work hours to 30 hours a week to take care of his family. Additionally, he incurred 
additional expenses related to her incapacity, medical treatments, and providing 
financial support for relatives caring for his wife and children. 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that before becoming ill, she was making approximately 
$52,000 a year, plus commissions of about $45,000. When she was pregnant with her 
first daughter, she stopped working for a while, but then returned to work. During the 
pregnancy of her second daughter, she became so ill that she was unable to work until 
2010. Applicant’s wife testified that she has been doing better since 2010. She has 
been working two part-time jobs, and has combined earnings of about $300 a week, or 
$1,200 a month. 
 
In his July 2009 SCA, Applicant disclosed he had financial problems that 
included his failure to file and to pay his federal and state income taxes, delinquent 
accounts in collection, credit cards cancelled or suspended, and being over 90 and 180 
days delinquent on some accounts. Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in April 
2013. He again reiterated his financial problems, including his failure to file and pay 
federal and state taxes, that his mortgage was in foreclosure, and that he had numerous 
delinquent accounts. 
 
In his 2013 SCA, and at his hearing, Applicant explained that his financial 
problems resulted from his wife’s medical problems and his period of unemployment. 
Between 2002 and 2010, he was forced to reduce his work hours to take care of his 
family, and his wife was no longer able to work and financially contribute to the 
household. He also incurred additional expenses to take care of his children and to pay 
his wife’s medical expenses. Additionally, he was laid off in September 2013, and 
unemployed until March 2014. Applicant was unable to find employment in his home 
state. In March 2014, he took a job in another state, about 1,000 miles away from his 
family. His current salary is approximately $7,100 a month, but working and living in 
another state increased his living expenses. 
 
Concerning his tax problems, Applicant explained that he filed his federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 1993 to 2001, and paid any owed taxes. Applicant 
testified that he never filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2002 through 
2005, and he did not pay any federal income taxes for those years.  
 
Applicant did not timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2006 through 2011, which he filed in May 2015. (AE U) He also failed to timely pay his 
federal income taxes for at least tax years 2006 through 2009. 
 
From 2002 to 2011, Applicant was a 1099 employee. As such, he was required 
to keep track of his own income records and to file and pay estimated quarterly self-
employment taxes. Applicant claimed that he kept his income records for many years, 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
but at some point, his wife and her friend destroyed the records because they were 
mildewed and had cockroaches.  
 
Applicant claimed that he failed to timely file and to pay his taxes because of his 
wife’s serious illness. He was living through very difficult times and had difficulty keeping 
up with day-to-day events such as taking care of his daughters, managing the home, 
and taking care of his wife. Applicant explained that he never filed his 2006 through 
2011 income tax returns until 2015, because he was under the impression that he was 
required to file all his income tax returns retroactively in order, and he was overwhelmed 
by the task.  
 
Applicant claimed that he hired a tax resolution firm in 2008, to help him file his 
taxes, but his wife’s condition worsened and he did not do anything with his taxes until 
2015. He presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. Applicant and his 
wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2014, trying to prevent the foreclosure 
of the home mortgage. (AE A) The bankruptcy attorney referred Applicant to an 
accountant to help Applicant file his income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2011.  
 
Applicant testified that from 2006 to 2009, he was earning approximately $60 an 
hour, and working at least a 30 hour week as an independent contractor. 
Notwithstanding, in his income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2009, he claimed 
he received no income. I note that although Applicant filed his income tax returns for tax 
years 2006 through 2011 in 2015, the IRS has not accepted his income tax returns. I 
find his tax problems are unresolved. In his Chapter 13 filing, Applicant estimated he 
owes the IRS around $27,000. However, he submitted no documents to establish his 
IRS assessed tax liability. 
 
Applicant and his wife’s current monthly income is about $9,000. They pay the 
bankruptcy trustee $3,589 monthly. Applicant anticipates a $10 an hour raise if he is 
determined eligible for a clearance. He believes that with the anticipated income from 
his current job he will be able to successfully complete the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
proceeding, and pay his living expenses and any remaining debts.  
 
All the delinquent financial accounts alleged in the SOR were included in the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. I note that SOR ¶ 1.e was paid through the bankruptcy 
proceeding. (AE M) SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i were also paid in September 2014. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed that he had no prior financial problems. 
However, during cross-examination Applicant admitted that he and his wife filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1996, because they accrued high credit card debt 
while in college.  
 
Applicant submitted four favorable reference statements from a coworker and 
three supervisors. He is considered to be a valuable employee who displays exemplary 
performance and always meets or exceeds his job requirements. Applicant continuously 
pursues advance training and certifications, increasing his technical expertise and value 
to his employer. He was instrumental in helping his employer secure a large, important 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
contract. All of his references lauded Applicant’s judgment, character, and 
trustworthiness, and strongly recommended his eligibility for a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2002 through 2011, and his history of financial problems (established by his 
answer to the SOR, his testimony, and credit reports) raise the applicability of the 
following financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g) “failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply, and do not 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. I 
considered Applicant’s wife’s serious, long-term illness and his period of unemployment, 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
which could have resulted in, or contributed to, his delinquent debts. These are 
circumstances that adversely affected his finances, and they were largely beyond his 
control.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to act responsibly under his circumstances. He 
knew he was required to keep his income records, to file estimated quarterly taxes, and 
to timely file and pay his taxes. His wife’s illness does not excuse Applicant’s 
deliberately failure to timely file and pay his federal taxes for 10 years.  
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in November 2014, 
apparently to prevent the foreclosure of his mortgage. For his bankruptcy filing to be 
accepted, he was required to bring up to date his federal taxes filings. He presented 
little evidence of any efforts to resolve his financial and tax problems prior to his 2014 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. Applicant’s evidence failed to show that he was financially 
responsible under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant also claimed that he never filed his 2006 through 2011 income tax 
returns until 2015, because he was under the impression that he was required to file all 
his income tax returns retroactively in order, and he was overwhelmed by the task. He 
provided no documentary evidence to show that he communicated with the IRS, made 
any payments to the IRS, or of any efforts to establish a payment plan. He also failed to 
submit documentary evidence of the extent of his debt to the IRS. 
 
 I find Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to show that his financial 
problems “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” 
under AG ¶ 20(a). The available information is insufficient to establish clear indications 
that he does not have a current financial problem. Financial considerations concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e was resolved through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy process, and SOR 
¶¶ 1.h and 1.i were paid in 2014. I have credited Applicant with mitigating these SOR 
allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old software systems engineer who has worked for federal 
contractors from 2001 to present, except for a period of unemployment between 
September 2013 and March 2014. Applicant’s wife’s medical problems and his period of 
unemployment contributed to his financial problems. Notwithstanding, he failed to 
establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances and that he has a track 
record of financial responsibility. His evidence is insufficient to establish valid reasons 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for his failure to timely file and pay his income taxes from tax years 2002 to 2011. 
Although he filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2011 in 
2015, Applicant never filed or paid federal income taxes for tax years 2002 through 
2005.  
 
I also find that he failed to establish clear indications that he does not have a 
current financial problem. Although he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and 
included all the debts alleged in the SOR, the debts have yet to be discharged. 
Furthermore, as of the closing of the record, the IRS had not accepted his filing for tax 
years 2006 through 2011, and it is not clear what the total extent of his tax liability is.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s medical problems presented a compelling case in mitigation. 
However, the favorable evidence does not outweigh the serious security concerns 
raised by his failure to timely file and pay his federal taxes. The Appeal Board recently 
explained the concern regarding individuals who fail to file and pay their taxes:  
 
A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal Government 
for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
ISCR Case No. at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). Applicant’s consistent failure to 
abide by the obligation of all citizens to pay their taxes raises the concern that he would 
similarly fail to honor his security obligations. 
 
Once a security concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that 
granting or reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this 
time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in 
the future. With more effort towards resolving his past-due debts and a track record of 
financial responsibility, he may well be able to demonstrate his eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
His access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d, 1.f, 1.g,   Against Applicant 
   1.j-1.l: 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
