 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-03324 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges and the record establishes that 
he used marijuana 3 times from January 1998 to January 2001, and on 10 to 25 
occasions from 2008 to June 2013. He provided accurate information about his illegal 
drug use on his May 9, 2007 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). Applicant held a security clearance from 
August 2007 to present. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, 
drug involvement security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified information is 
denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On May 9, 2007, and August 14, 2013, Applicant completed and signed two SF 
86s. (GE 1; GE 2) On July 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
 
2 
                                         
 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under AGs H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct).  
  
On August 18, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On October 14, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 27, 
2015, the case was assigned to me. On December 9, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
January 12, 2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered three exhibits and Applicant offered two exhibits, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 16-18; GE 1-3; AE A-B) 
On January 19, 2016, I received a transcript of the hearing.   
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 
2.a, and he also provided some extenuating and mitigating information. He denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old systems engineer, who is seeking to retain his security 
clearance. The same defense contractor has employed him for 12 years. (Tr. 6-7, 26) In 
1997, he graduated from high school, and in 2003, he received a bachelor of science 
degree in electronics engineering technology. (Tr. 6) In 2013, he was awarded a master 
of science degree in system engineering. (Tr. 6-7) He has never married, and he does 
not have any children. (Tr. 7; GE 1; GE 2) He has never served in the military. (GE 1; 
GE 2) 
 
Personal Conduct and Drug Involvement 
 
When Applicant completed his May 9, 2007 SF 86, he was asked about illegal 
drug use in the previous seven years, and he disclosed three marijuana uses from 
January 1998 to January 2001, while he was in college. (GE 1) At his hearing, he said 
this was accurate information. (Tr. 19-20, 23)  
 
Applicant’s descriptions of when he used marijuana were estimates. (Tr. 23-25) 
In his October 15, 2013 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI), he estimated he used marijuana five times per year; however, his 
interview did not specify the years he used marijuana five times each year. (GE 3) 
Moreover, he said he made a high estimate of his marijuana use to ensure he was 
making full disclosure of his marijuana use. From 2008 or 2009 to 2013, he said he 
used marijuana about two to five times a year with a particular group of his friends. (Tr. 
20-21, 35) He stopped using marijuana in June 2013. (Tr. 34) The decision to stop 
using marijuana was reinforced when he learned during his October 2013 OPM PSI that 
marijuana use was prohibited for security clearance holders. (Tr. 21, 23, 27, 29, 31, 34-
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
                                         
 
35) He told the OPM investigator that he was willing to stop using marijuana in order to 
maintain his security clearance. (Tr. 32) 
 
Applicant’s employer prohibits illegal drug use. (Tr. 25-26) Applicant’s colleagues 
consider marijuana use to be “fairly acceptable,” and some of them hold security 
clearances. (Tr. 27) After October 2013, he told his friends that he does not use 
marijuana because it would put his job in jeopardy. (Tr. 29) Some of his friends have 
prescriptions authorizing marijuana use. (Tr. 33) When he sees friends use marijuana, 
he leaves that location. (Tr. 30, 34) His friends do not consider Applicant to be a 
marijuana user. (Tr. 22)      
 
Character Evidence 
 
Two customers receiving assistance from Applicant lauded his diligence, 
professionalism, ethics, integrity, loyalty, competence, and trustworthiness. His valuable 
assistance was very helpful. He is an asset to his company, community, and country. 
(AE A; AE B)   
   
Policies 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
4 
                                         
 
This decision is not based, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. Thus, any decision to deny a security 
clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse”;2 “(c) illegal drug possession”; and “(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply because Applicant used 
marijuana on 10 to 25 occasions from 2008 to June 2013.3 He possessed marijuana 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
 
5 
                                         
 
before he used it. He used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Consideration 
of mitigating conditions is required. The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s 
responsibility for proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
                                                                                                                                            
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances.  
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are 
contained in 21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. 
See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement 
of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
                                         
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). 
 
Applicant recognized the adverse impact on his authorization to have continued 
access to classified information additional marijuana use will have. There is no evidence 
of marijuana use after June 2013. He said he intends to continue to abstain from illegal 
drug possession and use. However, he has ongoing friendships with marijuana users. It 
is too soon to conclude that his marijuana use happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur. His marijuana use while holding a security clearance continues to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. He did not provide proof 
of satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.    
 
In conclusion, I have credited Applicant with mitigating the three marijuana uses 
from January 1998 to January 2001 while he was in college. Those three marijuana 
uses are not recent, and he did not use marijuana again for seven years. However, 
Applicant’s possession and use of marijuana on 10 to 25 occasions from 2008 to June 
2013 continue to raise security concerns. From 2008 to present, Applicant’s company 
prohibited illegal drug use, and he held a security clearance. The passage of more time 
without illegal drug use is necessary to demonstrate a sufficient track record of no drug 
abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
                                         
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsification of Applicant’s May 9, 2007 SF 86, 
which was used to process the adjudication of his security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
In his May 9, 2007 SF 86, Applicant was asked whether in the last seven years 
he used marijuana. Applicant answered, “Yes,” and he disclosed that he used marijuana 
three times from January 1998 to January 2001. In his October 15, 2013 OPM PSI, he 
estimated he used marijuana five times per year; however, his interview did not specify 
the years he used marijuana five times each year. Moreover, he explained his estimate 
of five times per year was his attempt to be conservative and fully disclose the 
magnitude of his marijuana use. He credibly stated that his marijuana use five times a 
year related to the years 2008 to 2013, and not to the years 1998 to 2001. All of the 
evidence of his marijuana use is based on his self-reports. He insisted that he reported 
accurate information on his May 9, 2007 SF 86. Applicant has refuted AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
The other personal conduct concern in SOR ¶ 2.a relates to his marijuana use 
while holding a security clearance. This allegation is explicitly covered under Guideline 
H, and is sufficient for an adverse determination under that guideline. Marijuana use 
while holding a security clearance reflects “questionable judgment . . . or unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations [and raises] raise questions about [his] reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” See AG ¶ 15. However, as 
it is a duplication of the same conduct and concern described under Guideline H, 
personal conduct concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
                                         
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has achieved important employment goals, demonstrating some self-
discipline, responsibility, and dedication; however, this evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate security concerns. Applicant is a 37-year-old systems engineer, who has been 
employed by the same defense contractor for 12 years. In 2003, he received a bachelor 
of science degree in electronics engineering technology, and in 2013, he was awarded 
a master of science degree in system engineering. Two customers receiving assistance 
from Applicant lauded his diligence, professionalism, ethics, integrity, loyalty, 
competence, helpfulness, and trustworthiness. He is an asset to his company, 
community, and country.    
 
The adverse information is more significant. Applicant possessed and used 
marijuana on 10 to 25 occasions from 2008 to June 2013. During those years, his 
company prohibited illegal drug use, and he held a security clearance. These are 
relatively recent and serious rule violations.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With continued abstinence from marijuana use, he may well be 
able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
  
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, drug involvement 
security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
