 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04171 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a public trust position to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges he is delinquent on 15 charged-off and collection accounts, and failed to 
timely file and pay his Federal and state income taxes for tax years 2007 through 2012. 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his finances. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On February 7, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued an SOR detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
financial considerations. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant a public trust position.  
 
On March 18, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated September 28, 2015. The FORM contained seven attachments 
(Items).  
 
On October 9, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He was informed he could submit any material he 
wished to be considered. His response was due November 8, 2015. No material was 
received. On January 6, 2016, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied having failed to file his federal 
income tax returns in a timely manner for tax years 2008 through 2012 and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2008 and 2010 because he filed some returns in 
November 2013, June 2014, or October 2014. He stated he intended to file his 2007 
federal income tax return and his state income tax returns for tax year 2007, 2009, 
2011, and 2012 as soon as possible, (Item 2) He admitted owing the 15 charged-off or 
collection delinquent obligations, which totaled more than $24,000. He indicated he was 
in the process of filing for bankruptcy protection. He provided no documentation 
showing the bankruptcy was filed or that all of his federal and state income tax returns 
have been filed. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old customer service representative who has worked for a 
defense contractor since June 2013 and seeks to obtain access to classified 
information. (Item 3) From December 1998 through August 2002, he honorably served 
in the U.S. Navy. (Item 3) Applicant provided no information about his duty performance 
and provided no character reference letters. Applicant was unemployed from August 
2011 through June 2013. (Item 3, 7) In June and July 2007, he was also unemployed. 
(Item 3) 
 
In early 2012, Applicant received medical treatment for extreme abdominal pain. 
He did not have medical insurance. Six of the SOR debts, which total more than 
$11,000, are for delinquent medical accounts resulting from his 2012 treatment. 
 
In Applicant’s June 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), he indicated he failed to pay his 2007 through 2012 Federal and state income 
taxes and estimated he owed approximately $2,300. (Item 3) He indicated he felt 
overwhelmed over not filing his taxes and had decided not to address his delinquent 
 
3 
taxes until gainfully employed. (Item 3) On his e-QIP, he also listed nine delinquent 
debts.  
 
Applicant indicated in a July 2013 Personal Subject Interview (PSI) that he had 
not filed state or federal income tax returns for seven years. He stated he intended to 
contact the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the state franchise tax board (FTB) to 
set up reasonable repayment arrangements. (Item 7) When asked about his delinquent 
accounts, he stated he intended to contact his creditors and make repayment 
arrangements to address the delinquent obligations for those debts he recognized. 
(Item 7) He did not recognize numerous debts about which he was questioned. (Item 7) 
 
In March 2015, Applicant indicated he had “obtained representation from a 
bankruptcy attorney” and had “consulted with a tax professional” and was in the process 
of filing his remaining state and federal income returns. (Item 2) Applicant did not 
provide any documentation as to what services these individuals were able to provide 
him. There is no evidence that the bankruptcy was filed or that that tax returns had been 
filed. Applicant asserted some returns had been filed and others would be filed as soon 
as possible, but no documents were provided showing actual filing. Additionally, the 
amount of state and federal taxes owed has not been established. Applicant failed to 
show any payments on his taxes or delinquent obligations, evidence of an agreed upon 
repayment plan, or payment in accord with any such repayment plan. Absent 
documentary evidence of payment, the Government argued, he failed to mitigate the 
concern.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
 
4 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating 
to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns in a timely 
manner. He asserted, but failed to document, that he filed state and federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2007 through 2012. He has unpaid charged-off and collection 
accounts, which total more than $24,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
Applicant admits his delinquent obligations, which appear on his credit reports, 
including the three delinquent obligations he denied in his SOR response. There is no 
evidence he has paid any of his delinquent obligations. Applicant’s explanation for 
failing to timely file and pay his state and Federal income tax was that he did not have 
funds to pay his taxes and would pay them when he was gainfully employed. He asserts 
he has filed some of his federal income tax returns, but filed them six month to five 
years late. Some returns have yet to be filed. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer since June 2013. In July 2013, he was made aware 
of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. He did not recognize some of 
the delinquent accounts when questioned, but acknowledge the remainder and said he 
intended to contact the creditors and arrange repayment plans. He also said he 
intended to file his delinquent federal and state income tax returns. He provided no 
documentation showing payment on his debts or the filing of his tax returns. By failing to 
document the payment of delinquent debts he has failed to act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 In March 2015, Applicant, in responding to the SOR, stated he had filed some of 
his federal and state returns and planned on filing the remainder as soon as possible. 
He also said he intended to address his delinquent debts through bankruptcy. In 
October 2015, he received the FORM and was informed he could submit documentation 
as to the status of his delinquent accounts. No documents were received. 
 
It is noted Applicant was unemployed from August 2011 through July 2013, when 
he obtained his current employment. Additionally, six of the debts, which totaled more 
than $11,000, were the result of his 2012 medical treatment. The unemployment and 
medical treatment were events beyond his control; however, AG ¶ 20(b) requires the 
individual to act responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to make any payment on 
his delinquent obligations, even on the $53 medical debt (SOR 1.k), indicates that 
Applicant has not acted responsibly.  
 
 Applicant was given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies. 
Failing to pay taxes and his debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided 
no evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He has not demonstrated 
that his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under 
control. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply. There is no showing 
of a good-faith effort to satisfy debts or a showing that payments have been made in 
accord with a repayment agreement. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(d) do 
not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on his taxes or other 
delinquent obligations.    
 
AG & 20(d) does not apply because no payments have been made. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant must not only 
 
7 
dispute the obligations, but must also provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. He failed to do 
this. Additionally, the majority of the delinquent obligations were admitted. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his July 2013 interview, which was reinforced 
by the April 2015 SOR, and September 2015 FORM. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such information, and by 
relying solely on his scant explanation in his response to the SOR, he failed to mitigate 
the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is whether his 
financial circumstances raise concerns about eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).)  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to be eligible for a 
public trust position. The determination of an individual’s eligibility and suitability for a 
 
8 
public trust position is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s 
current circumstances, a clearance is not recommended. In the future, if Applicant has 
filed his state and federal income tax returns, paid all required income tax, paid his 
delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise 
substantially addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his security worthiness.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his 
financial problems.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.aa:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
