 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-05200
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his past-due or delinquent
debts. His request for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
 Directive. 6.3.4
2
On November 18, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision2
without a hearing. On July 13, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of3
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 18, 2015. He was advised he had 30
days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM,
but he did not respond. The record closed on September 17, 2015, and the case was
assigned to me on October 16, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $29,626 for
seven delinquent or past-due student loan accounts (SOR 1.a - 1.g). Applicant admitted
all of the allegations, citing a failed business and a period of unemployment as the
circumstances underlying his financial problems. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) In addition to
the facts established by his admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked as a welder since January 2014. He has been married since October 2006. He
and his wife have a five-year-old child. Since 2006, Applicant has worked primarily as a
cook in various restaurants. In April 2013, he and his wife opened their own restaurant;
however, that business venture failed in October 2013, and Applicant was unemployed
until he started his current job.
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed the delinquent debt alleged at
SOR 1.a. Credit reports obtained during the subsequent background investigation and
adjudication in this case documented the other debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant
attributes the accrual of his debts to his failed restaurant business and his subsequent
unemployment. He did not provide any information showing he has taken action to pay
or otherwise resolve his debts. Applicant also has not obtained any financial counseling
or other professional assistance in resolving his debts. There also is no information in
the file showing that Applicant has a basis to dispute any of his debts.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
4
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). By contrast, the record does not support any of the
mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20. Applicant’s debts are recent and ongoing.
Although his indebtedness arose from a business failure and a period of unemployment,
mitigation requires a corresponding response that reflects well on Applicant’s judgment
and reliability. Applicant has not obtained any financial counseling and he did not show
that he has made any good-faith efforts to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. In
summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Aside from a brief period of unemployment in
late 2013, Applicant has been gainfully employed and is presumed to be a hard-
working, responsible husband and father. Nonetheless, without other information
suggesting his financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his
suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the
principal focus of these adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved
against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                            
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
