 
 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06969 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant surrendered her currently valid Irish passport, which does not expire 
until December 2023, “to the cognizant security authority” under Adjudicative Guideline 
(AG) ¶ 11(e). Security concerns pertaining to foreign preference are mitigated. Eligibility 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On May 30, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865,  Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the AGs, which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF made a preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign preference guideline.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On August 7, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 3) On October 16, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On October 27, 2015, the case was assigned to me. On December 9, 2015, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting 
the hearing for January 12, 2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. The 
government offered one exhibit, which was admitted into evidence without objection. 
(Tr. 16; GE 1) Applicant did not offer any documents at her hearing. On January 19, 
2016, I received a copy of the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing. On February 8, 2016, I 
received one exhibit from Applicant, which was admitted without objection. (Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A) On February 8, 2016, the record was closed.      
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted she held a currently valid Irish 
passport. (SOR ¶ 1.a) She also provided some extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old division director, who has been employed for 14 years 
in a well-known agency affiliated with the U.S. Government. (Tr. 8-9; GE 1; AE A) She 
was born in the United States and educated in U.S. schools through the graduate 
school level. In 1984, she graduated from high school, and in 1988, she received a 
bachelor’s degree in public administration. (Tr. 6) In 2006, she was awarded a master’s 
degree in emergency services administration. (Tr. 6-7)  
 
In 1984, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve. (Tr. 7) She completed 23 
years of active and reserve Army service. (Tr. 7) She honorably retired as a major in the 
Medical Service Corps in 2006. (Tr. 7) She did not deploy to any combat zones. (Tr. 7) 
Her highest award was the Army Commendation Medal. (Tr. 8) She has held a security 
clearance since 1988. (Tr. 9)  
 
In 2008, Applicant married. (Tr. 9) She does not have any children. (GE 1) 
  
In 2003, Applicant received dual citizenship with Ireland, which was available 
because her grandparent was from Ireland. (Tr. 19) In 2004, she received an Irish 
passport. At the time of her hearing, she possessed an Irish passport she renewed in 
2013, which would continue to be valid until 2023. (Tr. 19-20)  
 
Applicant believed that her Irish passport might facilitate her work for her agency 
because some areas of the world where she may deploy might be more hostile to a 
person holding a U.S. passport. (Tr. 21-25; GE 1) She did not utilize her Irish passport. 
Once security rules about possession of a foreign passport being incompatible with 
being eligible for access to classified information were clarified for her, Applicant elected 
to provide her Irish passport to her “cognizant security authority.” (AE A) On February 1, 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2016, Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) wrote that she received Applicant’s Irish 
passport and would retain it as part of her official duties. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes one condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case, “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.” Applicant was born in the United States. She obtained an Irish passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen, and she possessed it until January 31, 2016, establishing AG ¶ 
10(a). Consideration of the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
AG ¶ 11(e) fully applies. On February 1, 2016, Applicant surrendered her Irish 
passport to her cognizant security authority. Foreign preference security concerns are 
mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline C, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old division director, who has been employed for 14 years 
in a well-known agency affiliated with the U.S. Government. She was born in the United 
States and educated in U.S. schools through the graduate school level. She completed 
23 years of active and reserve Army service, and she honorably retired as a major. She 
has held a security clearance since 1988, and there is no evidence of security 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
violations, violations of her employer’s rules, abuse of alcohol, arrests, convictions, or 
use of illegal drugs.  
 
The only rationale for denying or revoking Applicant’s clearance was her 
continued retention of a currently valid Irish passport. After being advised that she could 
mitigate security concerns by ensuring her “passport has been destroyed, surrendered 
to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated” under AG ¶ 11(e), she 
surrendered her Irish passport to her cognizant security official.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person, and I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
continued Applicant security clearance eligibility. Foreign preference security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for continued access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
