Item 2. He also submitted Item 3, a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions (SF-85), on Oct. 4, 2011.1
1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02418
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant falsely denied illegal drug use during the year preceding his 2011
submission of an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing. Resulting
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on May 29, 2013.1
On March 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns
Item 1.2
Item 1. The FORM erroneously cites the dates of the SOR and Applicant’s response as 2014 vice 2015.3
Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations.4
Item 2; AE A.5
Applicant verified the accuracy of the OPM investigator’s summary of this interview, and adopted it as his6
statement under oath in his response to DOHA Interrogatories dated March 11, 2015. Item 4.
2
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The action was taken under Executive Order2
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on May 15, 2015, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge from the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on the written record without a hearing.  Department3
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on July 21, 2015. A complete copy of
the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded4
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on August 24, 2015. He submitted no additional material within the succeeding 30 days,
made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request
additional time to respond. DOHA assigned the case to me on December 10, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 27 years old. He has worked in engineering and scientific positions
on an Air Force base since May 2010, under various arrangements through his
university and a defense contractor. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2011, and a
master’s degree in May 2013, both in electrical engineering. He has never married and
has no children.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of the sole allegation
against him, with some explanation. Applicant’s admissions, including his March 11,
2015 answers to DOHA Interrogatories in Item 4, are incorporated into the following
findings of fact.
Applicant admitted, on his SF-86 and during his June 20, 2013 interview with an
investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM),  that he used marijuana6
from May 2006, while in high school, until February 2009, when the police raided a party
Item 2; Item 4.7
Item 2; Item 4.8
Item 4.9
Item 1; Item 3.10
Item 1.11
3
at the home he shared with several roommates with whom he was smoking it. The
police confiscated their remaining marijuana and paraphernalia, and Applicant was
fined, required to perform community service, and required to complete a substance
abuse class. During his OPM interview, he admitted that he also used marijuana at a
party during August 2011, and said that he failed to previously disclose that “by
mistake.”7
Applicant also admitted, in his 2013 SF-86 and OPM interview, to wrongfully
using painkillers and Adderall that had been prescribed for friends while he was in
college. He took a friend’s Adderall twice to help him on tests during college. He took
painkiller medications that were prescribed for a friend on several occasions during
2008. He initially said that he took those painkillers to relieve symptoms from removal of
a wisdom tooth, but subsequently admitted that he had a prescription for the painkiller
after that procedure, and later used his friend’s prescription drugs “for recreation and to
get high.”  8
After first declaring, several times during his June 2013 OPM interview, that he
had no other use of illegal drugs to disclose, Applicant admitted to additional drug abuse
that he had not disclosed on either his 2011 (SF-85) or 2013 (SF-86) Questionnaires.
He used (psilocybin) mushrooms during October or November, 2011 but intentionally
did not disclose it on his 2013 SF-86 because he knew that it might disqualify him from
clearance eligibility. He also admitted that he “dropped acid” (LSD) during July 2007 and
intentionally did not list this drug abuse for the same reason. Both of these incidents
involved experimental use of drugs provided by a friend.9
Applicant signed and certified the truth of his Electronic Questionnaire for Non-
Sensitive Positions (SF-85) on October 4, 2011, in connection with his work as a
university graduate assistant under contract with an Air Force research laboratory. In
response to the question, in Section 14 of that application, that asked whether he had
illegally used illegal drugs during the last year, he answered, “No,” and failed to disclose
his marijuana use in August 2011, as described above.10
In his response to the SOR Applicant said, “I was afraid to report every detail of
my experience throughout college, which I don’t mean to use this as an excuse. At the
time, I did not think that my actions would ever reflect into my professional career, as it
was only an occasional thing. I also did not mean to answer that question untruthfully.”11
4
The record lacks mitigating evidence addressing the quality of Applicant’s
professional performance or his track record with respect to handling sensitive
information and observation of security procedures. No character witnesses provided
statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his
case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
AG ¶¶ 16 (b) and (e) also cover several aspects of Applicant’s conduct, but they were neither alleged nor12
argued by the Government as disqualifying conditions.
Applicant’s omission of his August 2011 marijuana use on his 2013 SF-86 and his subsequent admission13
of additional drug abuse during his 2013 OPM interview were not alleged in the SOR, and therefore do not
support security concerns independent of the SOR-alleged omission from his 2011 SF-85. These facts are
discussed here solely because they are material and relevant to this determination that his omission of the
recent drug abuse on his 2011 SF-85 was deliberate concealment of what he knew to be a relevant fact.  
5
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that raise security concerns and may be
disqualifying. One applies to the allegation in this case:12
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant admitted that he smoked marijuana at a party during August 2011. He
affirmatively certified, on his October 4, 2011 SF-85, that he had not used any illegal
drugs within the past year. His claim, that he “did not mean to answer that question
untruthfully,” is not credible. He failed to disclose his August 2011 drug abuse on his
May 2013 SF-86 as well, claiming during his June 2013 OPM interview that this
omission was also a mistake. However, he admitted during that interview that he
intentionally failed to disclose several other incidents of drug abuse because he thought
they would disqualify him from obtaining a security clearance.  His deliberate13
concealment of recent drug abuse on his October 2011 SF-85 demonstrated
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations.
6
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security
concerns. Four MCs have potential applicability under the facts in this case:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant did not make a prompt, good-faith correction of his false denial of his
then-recent drug abuse in 2011, but instead excluded it from his 2013 SF-86 as well.
His significant history of additional, and intentionally undisclosed, drug abuse was
apparently not sufficient to raise Government security concerns under Guidelines E or
H. However, that pattern of denial and omission precludes a determination that
Applicant’s falsification concerning his August 2011 marijuana abuse was an innocent
mistake. His willingness to conceal potentially damaging information makes him
vulnerable to exploitation or duress. Thus, Applicant failed to meet his burden to
establish significant mitigation under any of these conditions.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
adult, who is responsible for the conduct that underlies the security concerns expressed
in the SOR. His deliberate attempt to conceal his drug abuse from the DoD
demonstrated untrustworthiness, unreliability, and bad judgment.  
Applicant offered insufficient evidence of counseling, rehabilitation, better
judgment, or responsible conduct in other areas of his life to offset resulting security
concerns. The potential for being subjected to pressure, coercion, or duress remains
largely undiminished, and he has not demonstrated a basis from which to reasonably
conclude that he should be trusted to honestly disclose facts that could adversely affect
national security in the future. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to
mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
