1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06135
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Arran Treadway, Esquire
February 16, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 3, 2014.  On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 8, 2015.  He answered the
SOR in writing through counsel on June 24, 2015, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received
the request soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on September 15,
2015.  I granted Applicant’s request for a delay until November 12, 2015, in order for his
counsel to be available.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 15, 2015, and I
2
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 12, 2015.  The Government offered
Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on his
own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) 1 through 13, which were received without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on November 20, 2015.  I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until December 11, 2015, to submit
additional matters.  On December 7, 2015, he submitted Exhibit 14, which was received
without objection.  The record closed on December 11, 2015.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information
to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 1987 while attending “Air
Force ROTC.”  (TR at page 26 line 15 to page 27 line 6.)  He later spent “seven and a
half” years on active duty, achieved the rank of Captain, and “was Honorably
Discharged from the Air Force in 1996.”  (Id, and TR at page 62 line 24 to page 63 line
5.)
1.a., 1.c. and 2.a.  Applicant was again granted a security clearance in 1999, and
in 2009 he was granted a “Top Secret” security clearance.  (TR at page 40 line 9 to
page 41 line 8, and GX 1 at pages 45~47.)  At the age of 44, in June of 2010, Applicant
first used cocaine at a friend’s birthday party.  (TR at page 28 lines 8~19, and at page
41 line 15 to page 42 line 25.)  In December of 2010, he used cocaine at the same
friend’s “New Year’s Eve” party.  (TR at page 28 lines 19~20, and at page 43 lines
1~20.)
1.b., 1.c. and 2.a.  Applicant also used marijuana, four times, during the June
2010 through December 2010 time frame.  (TR at page 33 lines 10~13.)  In April of
2013, he was diagnosed with “Deep Vein Thrombosis.”  (TR at page 33 lines 14~25.)
He was prescribed “Tylenol with Codeine” for his condition, but Applicant thought this
prescribed medication did not provide enough relief.  (Id, and TR at page 49 lines 4~22.)
As a result, he self-medicated with marijuana, provided by friends who had a
prescription for medical marijuana, about 20 times from April 2013 to his last usage in
October of 2013.  (TR at page 33 line 25 to page 34 line 3, and at page 50 lines 11~16.)
1.d.  and 2.a.  In August of 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with
possession of cocaine.  (GX 1 at pages 39~41.)  He avers that he was in Las Vegas
with a group of friends, and when one friend returned monies he owed Applicant, the
wad of $20 bills included a plastic bag, which contained cocaine, folded therein.  (TR at
page 27 line 18 to page 31 line 3, and at page 44 line 4 to page 46 line 17.)  Applicant
3
further avers that he did not know of the cocaine’s presence.  (Id.)  His testimony is
supported by an affidavit from the friend who tendered the tainted money.  (AppX 14
attachment C.)  He was arrested when he tried to enter a “Pool Club - - Beach Club,”
and they found the drug in his “jeans” that he had placed in a beach bag.  (TR at page
28 line 23 to page 29 line 13.)  As a result of this possession charge, Applicant
completed court ordered drug counseling and the charge was dismissed.  (TR at page
27 line 18 to page 31 line 3, and at page 44 line 4 to page 46 line 17.)  This is supported
by documentation from the court where Applicant was arraigned for the possession.
(AppXs 12 and 13.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
Applicant avers that he intends no future illegal drug use.  (TR at page 32 line 22
to page 33 line 4, and AppX 11.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
4
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
Paragraph 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline also notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.
Under Subparagraph 25(a), “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.  In addition, under
Subparagraph 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance” may
also be disqualifying.  Here, Applicant has used cocaine twice, and marijuana 24 times
after being granted a security clearance.  I can find no countervailing mitigating
condition that is applicable here.  As a former Captain in the U.S. Air Force, he clearly
knew the gravity of his conduct.  Guideline H is found against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations” may be disqualifying.
Here, Applicant used illegal substances, cocaine and marijuana, from June 2010 to
5
October 2013.  Again, I can find no countervailing mitigating condition that is applicable
here.  His last usage was a little more than two years ago; and despite being prescribed
pain killers, he chose not to seek further prescribed relief for his medical condition, but
rather self-medicated with marijuana, 20 times.  Guideline E is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Subparagraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Applicant is highly respected in the work
place and by his friends.  (AppXs 1~9.)  The record evidence leaves me with questions
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Drug Involvement and
Personal Conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
6
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
