1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-04887
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
In January 2013, Applicant was detected entering a military base with his
fiancée’s medical marijuana pipe in the pocket of his jacket the morning after she
borrowed the jacket to go smoke outside their home. He had recently experimented a
couple times with her marijuana, and failed an employer-ordered urinalysis test. He has
not abused any drugs during the past three years, and has no intention of doing so in
the future. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 4, 2013. On
February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
2
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on February 24, 2015, and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on June 29, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on July 9, 2015. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21,
2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 11, 2015. The Government
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection, and testified
on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until August
25, 2015, for submission of additional evidence. On August 14, 2015, Applicant
submitted AE H, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of
the hearing (Tr.) on August 19, 2015. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked for seven years. He is a high school graduate, who has no military service. He
has held a security clearance, on and off, during the past 15 years, including since 2009
in his current job, without incident. He has never married, but has lived with his fiancée
for more than eight years. He has no children. (GE 1; AE E; Tr. 7-9, 41-42.) 
Applicant admitted on his security clearance application, in his response to the
SOR, and during testimony, that he used some of his fiancée’s marijuana three times in
December 2012 and early January 2013. His fiancée was undergoing treatment for
cancer and had earlier been “prescribed” medical marijuana, which was legal under
their state law at the time, to help her with the cancer treatment’s side effects. Although
he knew that it was a violation of his employer’s no-drugs policy, and of Federal law, he
decided to try smoking it with his fiancée after his state legalized recreational marijuana
use and possession in December 2012. (AR; GE 1; GE 5; Tr.44-46.)
Applicant and his fiancée did not smoke in their house. On the evening of
January 15, 2013, his fiancée borrowed his jacket to go outside and smoke some of her
marijuana. The next morning, while Applicant was riding to work in a coworker’s car and
wearing that jacket, the gate guard at the base where they work detected the odor of
marijuana and directed that they be searched. Applicant then found that his fiancée had
left her marijuana pipe in his jacket pocket. He relinquished it to security personnel, who
arrested him for possession of marijuana, questioned him, then turned him over to his
employer’s custody. He was ordered to undergo a urinalysis test, that was later reported
to be positive for marijuana. (AR; GE 1; GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 46-49.)
Applicant agreed to enter his company’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
in which he successfully completed four substance abuse assessment and counseling
3
sessions between January 17, and February 5, 2013. The EAP counselor
recommended no further services or treatment beyond those visits, but suggested that
Applicant should undergo an initial and monthly random drug tests for the first year after
his return to work. On January 25, 2013, he was served notice of a two-week formal
disciplinary suspension that his employer imposed as a result of his violation of
company policies and procedures regarding controlled substances. On February 27,
2013, he, his union, and his employer executed a one-year Last Chance and Release
Agreement, permitting him to return to work subject to compliance with eight conditions
as set forth in AE C. He received formal authorization to return to work on March 19,
2013. (GE 1; GE 3; GE 5; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; Tr. 54-55.)
Applicant was charged with a single misdemeanor count of possession of a
controlled substance (marijuana) in Federal District Court, and pled guilty to that charge
on May 20, 2013. Under a court-approved agreement with the prosecutor, he was
granted a deferred entry of judgment and was ordered to serve one year of probation,
obey all laws, and comply with the rules and conditions imposed by his probation officer.
These conditions included abstinence from any drug or alcohol use, and submission to
random urinalysis testing. Upon successful completion of this probation, the agreement
called for the court to dismiss the proceedings without entry of a judgment of conviction.
(GE 1; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.)
Applicant’s probation-related urinalysis program required him to call the
supervising substance abuse treatment center every evening, and if his number came
up he had to report the next day for testing. He was tested from one to four times per
week during his probation, and estimated that he provided about 30 samples in total. All
of the tests were negative, and after eight months he was informed that he had
satisfactorily completed his probation and would be released early, with the charge and
remaining conditions dismissed. All twelve of his monthly random samples under his
employer’s testing program also tested negative, and he resumed full employment
status after the year he worked under the Last Chance Agreement. (GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 50-
54.)
Applicant had experimented with marijuana occasionally while in high school
during the early 1970s, but had not used it again until experimenting with it in December
2012. His last use of marijuana was several days before the January 16, 2013 incident
involving his fiancée’s pipe in his jacket pocket. He said that he tried her marijuana to
feel the effects, because it provided her relaxation and helped her to sleep better.
However, he decided that it was not for him because, instead of a calming effect, it
made him anxious and prevented him from sleeping well. He credibly testified that he
has no intention of ever abusing marijuana or any other drug in the future, and provided
a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation.
His fiancée also quit smoking marijuana several years ago and no longer has any in
their home, because she successfully completed her cancer treatments and felt
responsible for all the trouble he got into when she left her pipe in his jacket pocket. (GE
1; GE 5; AE H; Tr. 43-44, 56, 60, 68-69.)  
4
Two longtime coworkers, including his acting supervisor, wrote letters
commending Applicant’s good character, professional excellence, honesty, reliability,
and trustworthiness. He earned Excellence Awards from his employer for his work and
customer service in 2013 and 2015. (AE F; AE G; Tr. 32-36.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
5
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The three DCs raised by the evidence in this case are: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
Applicant admittedly experimented with his fiancée’s medical marijuana on three
occasions during December 2012 and January 2013. He held a security clearance at
the time. These facts support application of the foregoing DCs, shifting the burden to
Applicant to prove mitigation of resulting security concerns.
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The facts
in this case support application of two of them:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
6
Applicant’s marijuana use occurred three times more than three years ago, and
was experimental in nature. He did not like the effect it had on him, he realized that it
was a bad idea, and he successfully completed more than a year of intensive random
drug testing. He shared some of the medical marijuana that his fiancée was using at the
time in conjunction with her cancer treatment. She has since successfully completed
that treatment and stopped using marijuana for the past several years. These incidents
do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,
and there is compelling evidence that drug abuse is unlikely to recur. Substantial
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a) was accordingly established.
Applicant’s fiancée no longer uses marijuana or has any in their home, and he
does not engage in recreational activities where peer pressure to use drugs might exist.
He has been abstinent since that one brief period when he tried marijuana three times.
He testified credibly and provided a signed statement of intent that he will not abuse any
drugs in the future. These facts establish additional mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b).
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The two  conditions raised by Appellant’s actions are AG ¶ 31:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Appellant committed minor violations of Federal law by smoking marijuana on
three occasions as described above. He was not criminally charged with that marijuana
use, nor was that alleged under this guideline in the SOR. He pled guilty to the
marijuana possession offense that was alleged in the SOR, although he said that he did
not know that his fiancée had left her marijuana pipe in the jacket which he wore going
through the gate at the base the next morning. He was granted a deferred entry of
judgment on that charge, which was dismissed after he successfully completed the
resulting probation and drug testing program. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security
concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
7
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Appellant established substantial mitigation of any criminal conduct concerns
under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (d) for the reasons discussed above concerning the drug
involvement aspects of this case. It has been more than three years since he briefly
experimented with his fiancée’s marijuana, and he clearly demonstrated sufficient
remorse and rehabilitation to make recurrence unlikely. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The two DCs supported by some evidence are:
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing . . .; and
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment.
Applicant knew that his experimentation with marijuana violated his company’s
policy prohibiting drug abuse, as well as Federal law. This both subjected him to
adverse professional consequences and violated his commitment to his employer
concerning drug abuse. Security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(e) and (f) were accordingly
raised by substantial evidence under these facts.
8
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns under the
Personal Conduct guideline. The MCs that are plainly established by the evidence in
this case are: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
In addition to the discussion under the previous guidelines supporting these MCs,
Applicant fully disclosed his activities to his employer, complied with all EAP and court-
ordered requirements, and demonstrated an extended period of abstinence, thereby
mitigating concerns arising from his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and
mature individual who honestly admitted his brief lapse in judgment. His possession of
his fiancée’s pipe when entering the base more than three years ago was unknowing
9
and accidental. His family and employer are fully informed of his bad choices, and he
has completely stopped any further drug abuse, thereby substantially eliminating the
potential for pressure, coercion, or duress. Recurrence of such conduct is unlikely.
Overall, the record evidence creates no doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
