1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04800 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on December 
5, 2013. On January 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 15, 2015. 
Another administrative judge was assigned the case on December 1, 2015. On 
December 18, 2015, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
January 13, 2016. The case was transferred to me on January 12, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits which 
were admitted without objection as Government (Gov) Exhibits 1 and 2. Applicant 
offered four exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – D, without 
objection. The Government also requested administrative notice be taken of certain 
facts regarding the country of Iran. The administrative notice documents were marked 
2 
 
as HE I. Applicant did not object to the administrative notice documents.  The record 
was held open until January 27, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents.  Applicant timely submitted an additional document which was admitted as 
AE E. The transcript was received on January 19, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Administrative Notice – Iran  
 
 The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge 
and matters not subject to reasonable dispute.  
   
  The 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran, then a key U.S. ally, opened a long and 
ongoing rift in diplomatic relations between the United States and Iran. Currently, the 
United States does not have diplomatic relations with Iran. The U.S. Government has 
designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism, and it has special concerns about four 
particular areas of the Iranian government: (1) its efforts to acquire weapons of mass 
destruction (e.g., its nuclear program); (2) its support of and involvement with terrorism; 
(3) its support of violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and (4) it dismal 
human rights record. (HE I) 
 
  Iran does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S.-Iranian dual nationals 
solely as Iranian citizens subject to Iranian laws.  The spouse and children of Iranian 
citizens who become naturalized U.S. citizens are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian 
authorities even if the spouse and children do not have Iranian passports and do not 
consider themselves to be Iranian citizens.  Iran requires them to enter and exit Iran 
using an Iranian passport. When in Iran, they may be subject to surveillance, search, 
harassment, arrest, detention, or imprisonment. (HE I)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old president of a technology firm that does business with 
U.S. government agencies. The firm hopes to gain a facility clearance to be able to work 
on classified projects. This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He is 
married and has three adult daughters. (Note: The facts in this decision do not 
specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or locations in order to protect 
Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information.)  
 
Applicant was born and grew up in Iran.  He first came to the United States as a 
high school exchange student when he was 16. He lived with a family in the Midwest 
and attended a local high school. Upon graduating from the U.S. high school, Applicant 
returned to Iran in 1976, but immediately applied for a U.S. student visa. He returned to 
the United States in the fall and attended a U.S. college from September 1976 to May 
1978. He transferred to another U.S. university in September 1978. He was awarded a  
3 
 
Bachelor’s degree in May 1981. In 1984, he earned a Master’s degree at another U.S. 
university. (Tr. 19-20; Gov 1; Gov 2 at 2) 
 
Applicant met his wife while attending college. She was born and raised in the 
United States.  They married in 1983. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1988. Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1975. His children were born and raised in 
the United States. All three daughters attended U.S. schools and live and work in the 
United States. His oldest daughter is married. She and her husband have a son and are 
expecting a second child. (Tr. 20-24; Gov 1; Gov 2 at 2-3) 
 
Applicant’s first job was with a technology firm in the Midwest. His job did not 
require him to have a security clearance. He worked for the firm for 18 years with the 
exception of a one year leave of absence in 1987, in order to help his brother start a 
business.  In 2001, his brother passed away. Applicant resigned from the technology 
firm and moved to the area of the country where his brother’s business was located.  
Applicant and his two sisters took over the company that his brother started. They still 
run the company today. (Tr. 21-23) 
 
All of Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens and residents of the 
United States. His deceased brother was the first to immigrate to the United States, a 
few years before Applicant. His father immigrated to the United States in 1980. 
Applicant’s mother and two sisters immigrated to the United States in 1983. They 
became U.S. citizens in the 1990s. (Tr. 46, Gov 1; Gov 2-3) Applicant is also close to 
his wife’s family, all of whom are U.S. citizens who were born and raised in the United 
States. (see AE C) 
 
Applicant has several extended family members who are citizens of and reside in 
Iran. He has a 90 year-old aunt, who he speaks to on the telephone about twice a year. 
She lives with his cousin. He has an 80 year-old uncle, who is a retired water irrigation 
engineer, whom he speaks with about twice a year. His cousin is a high school teacher, 
but he has little contact with her. He provides no support for any of his extended 
relatives who reside in Iran. (Tr. 30-31, 39-42; Gov 2 at 3-4) 
 
All of Applicant’s assets are located in the United States. He and his wife own 
their home, three rental properties, and some farm land located in various areas of the 
United States. He intends to live and retire in the United States. In 2003, he purchased 
a burial plot next to where his brother is buried. His brother is buried in a location close 
to Applicant’s home. (Tr. 28; AE A; AE B)  
 
Applicant possessed a valid Iranian passport, which was issued in June 2012, 
and has an expiration date of June 2017. Previously, Applicant renewed his Iranian 
passport in 1999 in order to be able travel to Iran. Because Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship, Iran will not allow Iranian citizens to travel to Iran using another country’s 
passport. (Tr. 27, HE I)  
 
Having lived in the United States since 1975, Applicant has traveled to Iran on 
four occasions over a period of 40 years. He traveled in 1976 after he graduated from a 
U.S. high school. He traveled in 1978 for a few weeks. These trips occurred before he 
4 
 
became a U.S. citizen and before the revolution in Iran. In 1998, he traveled with his 
mother to visit her older sister. They left after three days because his father had a heart 
attack in the United States and they rushed home to be with him. In 2004/5, he traveled 
with his parents. His father wanted to visit with his sisters. His father was in a wheel 
chair at the time and he traveled in order to assist his father. In late 2007, he traveled 
with his wife and three daughters to sightsee and visit extended family members. It was 
the first and only time his wife and daughters have traveled to Iran. His wife and 
daughters did not have individual Iranian passports. Their photos and names were 
attached to Applicant’s  Iranian passport as dependent family members. He last traveled 
to Iran in 2013 with his mother. His mother wanted to visit her two brothers, both of 
whom were terminally ill. They stayed for 10 days. (Tr. 25 – 27; Gov 2 at 5, 8, attch 2) 
 
Applicant has not used his Iranian passport for any other foreign travel. He 
surrendered his Iranian passport to his facility security officer in late December 2013 or 
early January 2014.  He offered to destroy the passport, but was advised not to destroy 
it. He does not intend to travel to Iran in the future. He is willing to renounce his Iranian 
citizenship. (Tr. 28, 34-37; Gov 2 at 8)  
 
The record was held open for two weeks to allow Applicant the opportunity to 
provide proof that his passport was surrendered to his facility security officer or that he 
destroyed his passport. Applicant destroyed his passport in front of his attorney. His 
attorney verified that the passport was destroyed and provided a photograph of 
Applicant’s defaced Iranian passport. (Tr. 47-48; AE E)   
   
Applicant voted in Iranian national elections in 1997, 2001, 2005, 2009 and 2013. 
He voted at a location in the United States. Polling stations were set up in local hotels 
and once at the Pakistani Embassy. He used his Iranian passport for identification. He 
was a U.S. citizen when he voted in the national elections. Applicant voted for the pro-
democracy candidates. He believed that his vote would benefit the U.S. Now that he 
understands that this is a security issue, he will not vote in future Iranian elections. He is 
also not able to vote in future Iranian elections because his Iranian passport is 
destroyed. (Tr. 32-34) Applicant routinely votes in U.S. local and national elections. (Tr. 
37)   
 
Reference Letters 
 
 Applicant’s wife wrote a letter stating that she met her husband while a senior in 
high school while taking a college course. They were married two years later. They 
have been married 32 years and have raised three daughters and have one grandson. 
They spent many Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays with her family when her 
children were growing up. They now host 40-50 family members at their home for 
Thanksgiving. She says her husband believes in hard work and honesty. After 
becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant makes an effort to vote in every election. He carefully 
researches each candidate before deciding who to vote for. He believes it is a privilege 
and a responsibility. She indicates her husband’s family immigrated to the United States 
years ago and none has expressed an interest in returning to Iran. Her husband 
returned to Iran to visit aging aunts and uncles. The visits were short and her husband 
5 
 
was always glad to be back home when he returned. Their lives are built in the United 
States. They have no assets or connections in Iran. (AE C at 1-2) 
 
 A niece, cousin and brother-in-law all wrote letters attesting to Applicant’s 
excellent character and integrity. (AE C at 3-6) Several of Applicant’s former co-workers 
wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf. They describe Applicant as a devoted family man, a 
man with high personal and professional standards. Each of them have known 
Applicant for over 25 years and praise his work ethic, teamwork, and commitment to 
friends and family. (AE D at 1-7)   
 
The IT Director and Government Contracts Manager of Applicant’s company also 
wrote a letter. He also serves as the company’s FSO. He has worked for the company 
since October 1990. He met Applicant in 2001 when he took over management of the 
company after the death of his brother. He states Applicant has a strong work ethic. He 
is among the first to arrive in the office in the morning and the last to leave at night. He 
has overseen the growth of the company. Applicant conducts all of his business deals 
with honesty, fairness and truthfulness. (AE D at 8)      
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG & 9:       
  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concern under paragraph 10.  
 
AG & 10(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) Possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) Military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
(3) Accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, 
or other such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) Residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship 
requirements; 
(5) Using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
(6) Seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and  
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
 AG & 10(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign 
citizenship by an American citizen; 
 
 AG & 10(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise 
acting, so as to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
7 
 
organization, or government in conflict with the national security interest; 
and  
 
 AG & 10(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a 
country other than the United States: for example, declaration of intent to 
renounce United States citizenship; renunciation of United States 
citizenship.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 10(a) applies in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 10(a) applies because Applicant 
possessed a valid foreign passport which does not expire until 2017. Applicant also 
voted in Iranian national elections in 1997, 2001, 2005, 2009 and 2013.  AG ¶ 10(b) 
applies because the renewal of Applicant’s Iranian passport and his voting in the Iranian 
national elections occurred after Applicant became a U.S. citizen. Applying for a foreign 
passport and voting in a foreign election are considered an exercise of foreign 
citizenship.    
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The burden shifted to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline C also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 11(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country;  
 
AG & 11(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
AG & 11(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
AG & 11(d) use of a passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority;  
 
AG & 11(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and  
 
AG & 11(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United 
States Government.  
 
 AG ¶ 11(a) applies because Applicant was born in Iran. AG ¶ 11(b) applies 
because Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his Iranian citizenship. AG ¶ 
8 
 
11(e) applies because Applicant surrendered his passport to his FSO. He surrendered 
the passport in December 2013 or January 2014, before his background investigation 
interview.  Applicant destroyed his passport after the hearing. He would have destroyed 
the passport earlier but was advised by someone from the Government not to destroy it. 
While there is no evidence that Applicant’s voting in the Iranian national elections was 
encouraged by the U.S. Government, Applicant believed that he was assisting the 
United States by voting for pro-democracy candidates. While I cannot apply AG ¶ 11(f), 
I considered Applicant’s motivation for voting in the Iranian national elections under 
general whole-person factors.  
 
 I also considered that Applicant’s actions occurred before he submitted his 
security clearance application. Now that he is aware that possessing a valid foreign 
passport and voting in a foreign election raises security concerns, he intends to stop 
doing either action. He does not intend to travel to Iran. For these reasons, I find 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under foreign preference.  
   
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying under AG ¶ 7 according to the facts of this case: 
 
AG & 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
AG & 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
  The nature of the Iranian government creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶ 7(a) raises a 
security concern regarding Applicant’s relatives who are citizens of and reside in Iran. A 
9 
 
valid concern is raised with regard to Applicant’s aunts, uncle and cousins who reside in 
Iran. I find SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b for Applicant. Although, the government of Iran 
considers Applicant’s wife, children, mother and sisters to be citizens of Iran, they all 
live and reside in the United States.  His wife and children were born and raised in the 
United States. His sisters and mother have lived in the United States for over 32 years 
and are U.S. citizens.  The concern under foreign influence is not a significant factor 
with regard to Applicant’s immediate family members.  
 
  AG ¶ 7(b) is applicable because Applicant’s connections with his extended family 
members in Iran create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to help his extended family 
members by providing that information.   
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Of these conditions, three potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG & 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
place in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
  
AG & 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG & 8(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
I find AG & 8(b) applies. While Applicant has some familial obligation to his 
extended family members who are citizens of and reside in Iran, I find such obligations 
to be minimal in comparison to his sense of loyalty and devotion to his immediate family 
members, all of whom reside in the United States. Applicant has resided in the United 
States for over 40 years. He attended college and graduate school here. He met his 
wife and raised a family here. All of his professional life has been in the United States. 
All of his assets are here. Applicant’s closest family members and relationships are in 
the United States. He can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interest.  
 
Security concerns raised under Foreign Influence are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
10 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant has lived and 
worked in the United States for over 40 years. In particular, I found the letters of several 
of Applicant’s co-workers and his wife’s relatives persuasive in demonstrating 
Applicant’s established ties in the United States, both personally and professionally, 
over the past 40 years as well as his outstanding character traits.    
 
His wife, three daughters, son-in-law, grandson, mother and two sisters are 
citizens of and reside in the United States.  Applicant’s travel to Iran, possession of a 
valid Iranian passport, and voting in Iranian elections all occurred before he applied for 
a security clearance. He believed he was assisting the United States when he voted for 
the pro-democracy candidates in the Iranian elections. Once he understood the security 
concerns, he surrendered his Iranian passport to his FSO. He subsequently destroyed 
the Iranian passport in front of his attorney.  In the future, he does not intend to travel to 
Iran or to vote in Iranian elections.  
 
While Applicant has extended family members residing in Iran, his immediate 
family members and all of his investments are located in the United States. Applicant’s 
longstanding ties in the United States indicate that Applicant can be expected to resolve 
any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
