 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04318 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brian Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 4, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 22, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 27, 2015. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
On July 20, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, was 
provided to Applicant on August 18, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on October 22, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on November 21, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on November 1, 2012. Applicant did not adopt it as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on February 4, 2015. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.n, 1.p, and 1.s and admitted 
all the other 16 allegations. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant owes $18,293 in delinquent debts dating to 2010. They include 15 
debts to collectors who seek payment for medical debts Applicant stated were incurred 
on behalf of his son’s medical treatment (Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.m, 1.o, 1.q and 1.r). 
Applicant’s Answer states his son was born with a particular condition that needed 
medical treatment. He contends the insurance company originally agreed to pay the 
medical debts but later refused to pay because the medical condition of Applicant’s son 
was pre-existing. That medical treatment occurred in 2006. Applicant claims he could 
not work with the collector because it was rude and uncooperative in agreeing to an 
installment payment plan. These debts are unresolved. (Items 1, 2, 5-7) 
 
 Applicant’s Answer states that any medical debts listed in the SOR are unpaid. 
Since those debts were incurred he has paid all subsequent medical bills. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant denied the credit card debt in Subparagraph 1.n owed to a credit union 
for $174. He claims this debt should have been resolved years ago. He was to dispute 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
it. He did not submit any documents to show it was disputed or resolved. It is 
unresolved. (Items 1, 2, 5-7) 
 
 Applicant denies the electric utility bill for $222 is unpaid (Subparagraph 1.p). His 
Answer states it was paid in 2011. The credit reports show it was first reported as 
delinquent in 2011 and last had a payment made in 2013. Applicant did not submit any 
proof this debt was paid as he states and it appears on the July 20, 2015 credit report, 
the latest report in the File. This debt is unresolved. (Items 1, 2, 5-7)  
 
 Applicant owes $71 to a bank on a credit card debt (Subparagraph 1.s). His 
Answer claims he is current on all his credit cards. He intended to dispute this debt. He 
did not submit any evidence that he does not owe this debt or has disputed it. This debt 
is unresolved. (Items 1, 2, 5-7)  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2003 (Subparagraph 1.a). He 
was discharged in 2006 after making his payments to the Trustee. Applicant stated in 
his Answer that he filed when he was on active duty in the Air Force and he could not 
afford to support his family and his sister-in-law on his military pay. They could not live 
in on-base housing because of the six persons in his family. (Items 1, 2, 5-7) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2010 to the present, Applicant accumulated 18 delinquent debts, totaling 
$18,293 that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
2003 after he incurred debts he could not afford to repay. Applicant has a history of 
unpaid debts and an inability to control his personal finances as demonstrated by the 
debts from 2010 and the 2003 bankruptcy.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if his son’s medical problems in 2006 were 
unanticipated. Yet his son was born with the condition and Applicant should have known 
it needed to be corrected at some point in time. He should also have checked with the 
medical insurance company before having the treatment performed on his son. Four of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are non-medical and the remaining 14 are medical related. 
He has had five years to resolve them and has not done so. Applicant failed to prove 
AG ¶ 20 (b) applied because he did not submit sufficient evidence of the conditions that 
he asserted were beyond his control, and that he acted responsibly in resolving his 
delinquent debts during the time the debts were accumulating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past five years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
