1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-06507
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 9, 2016
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on February 27, 2014. (Item 3.)  On May 30, 2015, the Department of Defense
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) regarding Applicant. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing, with supporting documentation, on June
16, 2015 and requested a decision by an administrative judge without a hearing.
(Answer.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to
Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible and will1
not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant
conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on April 18, 2014. It was never
adopted by Applicant as her own statement, or otherwise certified by her to be accurate. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness.
Given Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative.
2
Applicant on July 28, 2015.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM August 3,1
2015. She was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit any additional
documentation. Applicant submitted additional information on or before August 31,
2015. Department Counsel had no objection to my considering the documents, and they
are admitted collectively as Applicant Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me on
September 3, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 36 and married. She is employed by a defense contractor, and seeks
to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted all the allegations in the SOR (1.a through 1.j). She also submitted additional
information to support her request for a security clearance.
The SOR lists nine delinquent debts (1.a through 1.i), including delinquent
Federal taxes from 2007, totaling approximately $15,550. The existence and amount of
the debts is supported by a credit report dated April 4, 2014. (Item 5.) The SOR also
alleges that Applicant had her debts discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy
Code in February 2008(1.j).
The current status of the debts, and taxes, is as follows:
1.a. Applicant admitted that she owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
$8,183 in back taxes for the 2007 tax year. A tax lien was filed for that year. Applicant
provided documentation showing that she had a payment arrangement with the IRS,
and was successfully following it. As of July 2015 the back taxes had been reduced to
$4,114.77. Applicant also provided documentation showing that she obtained a personal
loan in August 2015 in a sufficient amount to pay off her remaining tax lien. She further
states that the IRS was paid in full on August 31, 2015. (Answer at 4-8; Applicant
Exhibit A at 1-13, 29-35.) This debt is resolved.
3
1.b. Applicant admitted that she owed a judgment in the amount of $309. She
paid the judgment in full, including fees, on May 11, 2015. (Applicant Exhibit A at 47-
48.) This debt is resolved.
1.c. Applicant admitted that she was indebted for a bank credit card in the
amount of $650. This debt is the same as that set forth in allegation 1.h. Applicant
showed proof of payment of this debt in December 2014. (Answer at 10-18.) This debt
is resolved. 
1.d. Applicant admitted that she was indebted for a medical debt in the amount
of $70. Applicant showed proof of payment of this debt in October 2014. (Answer at 19-
20.) This debt is resolved.
1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $3,917 for a repossessed automobile.
Applicant provided proof of payment of this debt in May 2015. (Answer at 21-24.) This
debt is resolved.
1.f. Applicant admitted owing a bank $70. Applicant provided proof of payment
of this debt in May 2014. (Answer at 25-26.) This allegation is resolved. 
1.g. Applicant admitted owing a mobile telephone company $148 on a past-
due account. Applicant provided proof of payment of this debt in July 2014. (Answer at
27-28.) This allegation is resolved. 
1.h. This debt has been discussed under subparagraph 1.c, above. This
allegation is resolved. 
1.i. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt in the amount of $911.
Applicant provided proof of payment of this debt in June 2015. (Answer at 29-30;
Applicant Exhibit A at 60-61.) This allegation is resolved. 
1.j. Applicant admits filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in October
2007. She was discharged of all of her dischargeable debts in February 2008. (Answer
at 31.) Applicant has not filed for bankruptcy protection again. Under the particular
circumstances of this case, the fact of her bankruptcy eight years ago has no current
security significance.
Applicant supplied information showing that her current financial situation is
stable. She is gainfully employed with a good income, and was able to qualify for a
mortgage and purchase a house in 2015. (Applicant Exhibit A at 14-44.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
4
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant, by her own admission, and supported by the documentary
evidence, had nine delinquent accounts that she formerly could not resolve. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Applicant has successfully paid all of the
debts set forth in the SOR, many of them before issuance of the SOR. She also has
qualified for a mortgage in the last year, showing that her financial situation is now
stable. Accordingly, I find that Applicant has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” as required by AG ¶ 20(d). I also find that
“there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” as
required by AG ¶ 20(c). Since both of these mitigating conditions apply to the facts of
this case, Guideline F is found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline F, above, applies here as well. While Applicant has had financial problems in
the past, they have been resolved, and she has the knowledge and ability to avoid such
problems in the future. 
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(2), I have considered the facts of Applicant’s debt history.
Based on the record, I find that there have been permanent behavioral changes under
AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); and that there is a low likelihood of recurrence
(AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
situation. Accordingly, the evidence supports granting her request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
