KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: A DOHA proceeding is not a proper forum to debate whether marijuana should be
legal for some purposes.  The Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of
the Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  State laws that permit marijuana use
in certain limited circumstances do not pre-empt provisions of the Industrial Security Program. 
State laws do not alter the existing Guidelines.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-03734.a1
DATE: 02/18/2016
DATE: February 18, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03734
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
[name redacted]
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
December 9, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 24, 2015, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mary E. Henry denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 56 years old.  He began working
for his defense contractor employer in 1984.  He has been described as a person of strong character,
and a reliable and dependable employee with a strong work ethic.  In 1978, while in the military,
he was charged with possession of hashish and given non-judicial punishment.  In 2005, Applicant
sustained serious injuries in a motorcycle accident.  As a result of his injuries, he endures constant
pain and has short-term memory issues.  When seeking professional pain management, Applicant
was told to use narcotic drugs, but he declined to do so.  Medical marijuana was suggested to him
but he declined a prescription for it.  Subsequently, when a friend offered him marijuana, he began
using small amounts to help him sleep and ease his pain.  The marijuana helped with both as verified
by his family physician.  In 2012, during a traffic stop, the police found two marijuana smoking
devices in Applicant’s car.  He was charged with possession of marijuana and possession of drug
paraphernalia.  After his arrest, Applicant decided to stop using marijuana for medical purposes.
He was successful in doing this after completing an inpatient treatment program.  
When he decided to smoke marijuana to relieve his pain and help with his sleep, he
understood that marijuana was an illegal drug.  He admitted he knew that his use of marijuana was
likely against his company’s policy, and he knew that he could not use any illegal drugs, including
marijuana, while holding a security clearance.   
Applicant answered “no” to questions about drug use and criminal offenses on his security
clearance questionnaire.  One question asked if he had ever been charged with an offense involving
alcohol or drugs.  The other asked if he had ever illegally used or been involved with a drug or
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance.  Applicant acknowledged that he
intentionally falsified his answer about using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance
because he was afraid he would lose his job.  He denied intentionally falsifying the question about
his police record, as he did not consider his nonjudicial punishment a police record.  The SOR also
alleged that Applicant falsified his answer to a Government investigator when he stated he did not
use marijuana in his car in 2012 before being stopped by police.   
The Judge reached the following conclusions:  Applicant smoked small amounts of
marijuana for medical purposes on a regular basis for six years.  Under federal law, marijuana, even
that used for medical purposes, is illegal, making such use a security concern.  During the time of
his use of marijuana, Applicant held a security clearance.  He stopped using marijuana in 2012 after
his arrest, and he voluntarily sought inpatient treatment to assure the end of his marijuana use.  He
does not intend to use marijuana in the future.  He has mitigated any security concern about his
future use of marijuana.  However, he knew that marijuana was an illegal drug, and he knew that he
could not use it while holding a security clearance.  Nevertheless, he chose to do so for six years.
In doing so, he exercised poor judgment and betrayed the Government’s trust.  This use is not
mitigated.  Applicant acknowledged that he intentionally lied on his security clearance application
about his use of marijuana for medical reasons.  The Government has not established that applicant
121 U.S.C. § 801, et. seq.
2Indeed, it is beyond the scope of the Boards’s authority to pass judgment on the propriety of federal law or
federal policy.  Cf.  ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)(DOHA proceedings are not a proper forum
for challenging the validity of federal tax laws); ISCR Case No. 99-0519 at 6 (App. Bd. Feb. 23, 2001)(DOHA
proceedings are not a proper forum to debate or adjudicate the formulation of DoD policy concerning foreign passports):
ISCR Case No. 99-0457 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 3, 2001)(appeal process is not a proper forum to challenge the wisdom or
legality of provisions of the Directive); ISCR Case No. 02-00318 at 6-7 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2004)(neither DOHA
Administrative Judges nor the Appeal Board have the authority to adjudicate foreign policy or foreign relations issues).
3
intentionally falsified his answer when he failed to disclose the 1978 nonjudicial punishment action.
However, during his interview with an investigator, his denial that he had used marijuana before his
2012 arrest  was false, and Applicant knew it.  Because Applicant lied, the Government’s security
concerns have not been mitigated.  
Applicant argues that the Judge’s decision was not a “fair, impartial, and commonsense
decision” in accordance with the Adjudicative Guidelines, and the Judge failed to draw conclusions
that were reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Specifically,
Applicant’s appeal brief challenges the propriety of federal laws prohibiting the use of marijuana
and its classification as a Schedule I drug under the federal Controlled Substances Act.1  Applicant
asserts that there is no nexus between Applicant’s use of marijuana for medical purposes and any
legitimate security concern.  Applicant also asserts that, given the facts in this case, the Adjudicative
Guidelines were inflexibly applied, which runs counter to the policy expressed in the Directive.
Applicant also asserts that the Judge did not properly evaluate the case under the whole-person
concept.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
While emphasizing that his marijuana use was for medical purposes and undertaken to
provide relief from chronic pain, Applicant challenges the propriety of current federal law regarding
marijuana use given the fact that a significant number of states now allow marijuana use for medical
purposes.  The purpose of DOHA proceedings is to make security clearance determinations for
individual applicants based on the facts in each individual case.  DOHA proceedings are not a proper
forum to debate the pros and cons of whether marijuana should be legal for some purposes, how it
should be classified as a controlled substance, or the merits of DoD policy concerning drug abuse.
See ISCR Case No. 02-08613 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2005).2  The Directive presumes there is a nexus
between proven conduct under any of its Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 07-08113 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 15, 2008).  The granting, denial, or revocation of an
industrial security clearance is the exclusive province of the Executive Branch of the Federal
Government, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  State laws allowing for
the legal use of marijuana in some limited circumstances do not pre-empt provisions of the Industrial
Security Program and the Department of Defense is not bound by the status of an applicant’s
conduct under state law when adjudicating that individual’s eligibility for access to classified
information.  Indeed, as the Judge noted, the Director of National Intelligence issued a memorandum
entitled, “Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use.”  That memo states, in part, that
state laws “do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines[.]”  The Judge’s
recognition that Applicant’s conduct was in contravention of federal law and DoD policy– and
4
would disqualify him from holding a security clearance absent a sufficient showing of mitigation–
is not indicative of an “inflexible” approach to the application of the pertinent Adjudicative
Guidelines.  
Apart from his arguments regarding the appropriateness of federal drug policy, Applicant
is basically arguing that the Judge erred by not concluding that the circumstances of his marijuana
use and his current period of abstinence from the drug were mitigating.  Once the government
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable
security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and
decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  The nature of Applicant’s physical injuries
and his attempts to alleviate his chronic pain was evidence that the Judge was required to consider.
However, such evidence does not mandate a favorable decision.  Central to the Judge’s analysis was
her conclusion that Applicant knew that marijuana was illegal under any circumstances according
to federal law, and was also prohibited by his company’s policy.  She concluded that Applicant
made a serious error in judgment when he decided to use marijuana while holding a security
clearance.   Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence
or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
There is no presumption of error below.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08312 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jul. 14, 2005).  The Judge found against Applicant on two subparagraphs alleging falsification under
Guideline E.  On appeal, Applicant discusses Guideline E only peripherally, and does not assert
error on the part of the Judge with the requisite degree of specificity.  Thus, the Judge’s decision is
sustainable on the basis of Guideline E alone.
   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
5
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
