 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-05769 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Roger Mills, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
2 
 
 
On January 2, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 1, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On June 5, 2015, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 9, 
2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into evidence without objection. I held 
the record open until July 24, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to offer 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE F and G, which were received into 
evidence without objection. On July 17, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old product design engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2013. He seeks a secret security clearance to enhance his 
position within his company. (GE 1; Tr. 31, 34-35, 49-50)  
 
Applicant was awarded an associate of science degree in engineering in July 
2005, and a bachelor of science degree in aerospace engineering in May 2013. (GE 1; 
Tr. 32-33) At the time of hearing, Applicant was unmarried and living with his fiancée, 
who is employed as a pharmacy technician. His wedding date was scheduled for 
October 25, 2015. Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 33-34, 36, 41; 
GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists four debts totaling $25,808. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d) He 
sustained an injury in 2010 while in college and was required to undergo 
reconstruction surgery. Applicant was never billed for medical services received. 
Applicant’s father advised him that his medical treatment was likely subsidized 
because of his low income. When Applicant applied for student loans, the issue of 
past-due medical bills never came up and he was under the mistaken impression that 
he did not have any credit problems. (SOR response; Tr. 24-29; GE 2) 
 
Applicant first became aware of these debts during his April 2014 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (Tr. 18, 21-22; GE 2) 
Following his OPM PSI, Applicant pulled his credit report for the first time and began 
investigating his credit history. It was never his intent to avoid paying his just debts. 
 
3 
 
 
(Tr. 29-31, 43) A summary of Applicant’s four SOR debts and their current status 
follows: 
SOR ¶ 1.a - a $24,438 medical collection account. This account was paid in full 
on July 22, 2015. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Tr. 18-20, 22-24, 41-42; GE 3; AE F) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b - a $195 medical collection account. This account was paid in full on 
July 7, 2015.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Tr. 20-22, AE A)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c - a $260 past-due medical account. Applicant was unable to 
determine who the creditor was for this debt. A review of Applicant’s April 16, 2014 
credit report submitted by the Government does not provide any identifying creditor 
information. This debt does not appear on Applicant’s July 9, 2015 credit report. DEBT 
NOT SUBSTANTIATED. (Tr. 20-21, 44-46; GE 3; AE C) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d - $195 medical collection account. This account was paid in full on 
January 14, 2015. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Tr. 20-22, AE B) 
 
 Applicant has resolved all of his known debts. His budget reflects that he leads 
a modest lifestyle, lives within his means, and is current on all of his debts. Applicant’s 
annual salary is approximately $78,000 and his budget reflects a net monthly 
remainder of $1,818. (Tr. 36-42; AE C, AE G) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted two reference letters: (1) from a company engineering 
fellow and hiring manager; and (2) fellow employee and long-time friend. The 
collective sense of these documents describes Applicant as hard working, a team 
player, honest, and trustworthy. Both of the individuals support Applicant for a security 
clearance. (AE D, AE E)  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
 
4 
 
 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Partial credit is warranted under AG ¶ 20(a) because his medical debts 
occurred under such circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Full application of AG ¶ 
20(b) is warranted. Applicant could not have anticipated that he would be injured 
requiring ACL constructive surgery. When he became aware of his debts following his 
OPM PSI, he contacted his creditors and paid his known creditors in full. 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20 (d) is fully applicable. Although 
Applicant did not receive financial counseling, there are clear indications that his debts 
are resolved and all of his known debts are paid in full.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant 
because he did not dispute his responsibility for any SOR debts. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant had the misfortune of having an injury while in college at a time when 
he did not have adequate health care insurance. For reasons not entirely clear, he did 
not receive any bills for his constructive surgery. When he became aware of his 
medical bills following his OPM PSI, he paid three of the four bills in full. The available 
information for the fourth bill does not identify the creditor, making it impossible for 
Applicant to pay this debt. 
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s circumstances that 
led to his financial difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve 
his financial situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his 
reference letters, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
