 Exhibit 4 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 14-06703
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for
access to classified information via a security clearance. Applicant has addressed and
resolved the concern over his failure to file state and federal income tax returns for tax
years 2009, 2010, and 2011. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on May 17, 2012.  About three years later on July 13, 2015,1
after reviewing the application and information gathered during a background
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 Exhibit 4. 6
 Exhibit 4 at 26.7
2
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him  eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar3
to a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known
as Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR in an August
10, 2015 response consisting of a one-page memorandum. 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case
will be decided on the written record.  On September 9, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This5
so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on
September 21, 2015. Applicant replied in a timely manner and submitted a five-page
memorandum along with Exhibits A–G, which are admitted without objections. The case
was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.    
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security
clearance, which he has held for many years. He is employed as a senior engineer, and
he has worked in the defense industry for the same company or its successor-in-interest
since 1983. His employment history includes honorable service in the U.S. Navy during
1973–1981. He is a widower with two adult children. He has lived at the same
residential address since 1984. 
 
In May 2012, when completing a security clearance application for a periodic
reinvestigation, Applicant disclosed his failure to file state and federal income tax
returns for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011.  He also stated that his failure was due to6
missing papers, missing documents, and paperwork issues.  He also disclosed owing7
zero in back taxes to the state or federal tax authority. 
Consistent with his disclosures, the SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file state
and federal income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011, and that as of July
 Exhibit C. 8
 Supplemental Response to SOR and File of Relevant Material at 2. 9
 Exhibit G. 10
 Exhibit E. 11
 Exhibit F.  12
 Exhibit A.13
3
2015, those returns remained unfiled. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the
failures to file, and he explained that the returns would be filed no later than September
30, 2015. 
Applicant has now provided sufficient documentary proof that he filed the tax
returns in question on September 30, 2015.  In addition, Applicant provided the8
following explanation for his failure to file:
I did not purposely neglect my tax filings. I mistakenly overlooked the filing
of my taxes due to additional responsibilities. I was accustomed to
receiving [refunds] and did not realize the seriousness of the situation at
the time. However, I have remedied this problem by filing all of my state
and federal [tax returns] in question. Additionally, I am current on all tax
filings and have filed all of my [tax returns] since this incident occurred
from 2009–2011. Going forward I will ensure that all of my [tax returns] are
filed in a timely manner. I have learned from this mistake.9
He also provided a written statement under penalty of perjury that he will never again
fail to file his state and federal income tax returns, and he consented to the automatic
revocation of his security clearance if he violates his statement of intent.10
Applicant’s overall financial situation is established by a personal financial
statement, dated October 9, 2015.  He reported a monthly gross salary of $8,700,11
which is about $104,000 annually. He has modest expenses and debt payments,
resulting in a positive net remainder of $3,097 monthly. He reported assets slightly
greater than $1 million. 
Applicant has a good record of employment based on a review of performance
evaluations from 2009–2014.  In addition, he has the strong support of four current or12
former co-workers who have trust and confidence in Applicant’s fitness for a security
clearance.13
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to14
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 22
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).23
4
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As14
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt15
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An16
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  17
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting18
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An19
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate20
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme21
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.22
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.23
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.24
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 25
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant26
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  27
 AG ¶ 19(c). 28
 AG ¶ 19(g). 29
5
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it24
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant25
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 26
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  27
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of not meeting
financial obligations.  Likewise, the evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant failed28
to file annual state and federal income tax returns for three consecutive tax years, which
is a serious matter.29
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).30
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).31
6
 In mitigation, I have considered the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F.30
And the following mitigating condition is most pertinent: AG ¶ 20(c) . . .  there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate his failure to
file the tax returns in question. I reach that conclusion for the following reasons. First, he
self-reported the information about his failure to file tax returns and he has been truthful
and complete during the security-clearance process. Second, he met his self-imposed
deadline of September 30, 2015, to file the state and federal tax returns. Third, he
acknowledged his failure to file was due to neglect and was unintentional. Fourth, he
stated unequivocally that he will never again fail to file his state and federal income tax
returns. Fifth, I am persuaded that Applicant has learned his lesson and the likelihood of
recurrence is acceptably low. Sixth, he has a good record of employment and has
strong character references who support his application for a security clearance.
Seventh, Applicant’s overall financial situation is stable and strong, he is not financially
overextended, and there is no indication that his failure to file tax returns was linked to
an issue of security concern, such as drug abuse, alcohol abuse, or gambling.
Accordingly, based on those seven reasons, I conclude that there are clear indications
that Applicant’s tax problems are resolved and under control.   
Applicant’s history of not meeting his tax obligations by failing to file tax returns
for three consecutive tax years does not create doubt about his current reliability,
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he met his31
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
