 Exhibit 3 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-05232
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for
access to classified information via a security clearance. The security concern
stemming from his illegal drug involvement is not mitigated. Accordingly, this case is
decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on April 28, 2014.  About one year later on April 5, 2015, after1
reviewing the application and information gathered during a background investigation,
the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR),2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 See Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009), for a definition of waiver. 6 th
 Exhibit 3 at 30. 7
2
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a3
complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline H for drug involvement. Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2015. 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case
will be decided on the written record.  On September 17, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This5
so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on
September 28, 2015. Applicant has not replied. The case was assigned to me on
February 8, 2016.   
Ruling on Evidence  
Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the May 2014
background investigation. The summary, Exhibit 4, is not authenticated as required
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote
advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object
may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, a pro se
applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM does not equate to a waiver of the
authentication requirement.  The written record does not demonstrate that Applicant6
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not
establish that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility
the summary. Accordingly, Exhibit 4 is inadmissible and I have not considered it.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time.  He is employed as a UX designer for a technology-design company.7
He has had this particular job since November 2013. His educational background
 Exhibit 3. 8
 Exhibit 3 at 28. 9
 Exhibit 3 at 28. 10
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to11
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
3
includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 2007. He has never married and has no
children.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in April 2014.  In doing so,8
he disclosed a history of marijuana use.  He stated that he used marijuana on an9
occasional basis from about January 2004 to April 2014. In other words, he was using
marijuana during the same period when he submitted the application. He further stated
that: “THC [marijuana] needs to have its scheduling reconsidered. All the science
reports its medical use. I feel the end of prohibition is coming. I do not drink because the
side effects are way worse.”10
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted (1) using and purchasing marijuana
from about January 2004 to April 2014, with varying frequency; and (2) as of May 2014,
his intention was to continue using marijuana. Other than his admissions, Applicant did
not provide additional information or details about his illegal drug involvement. He did
not submit any documentation in response to the SOR or the FORM.   
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As11
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt12
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An13
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  14
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).20
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.21
 AG ¶ 25(a) and ¶ 25(c).  22
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting15
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An16
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate17
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme18
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.19
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.20
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it21
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Applicant’s involvement with marijuana is disqualifying under Guideline H.  In22
applying Guideline H to the facts of this case, I note that in an October 24, 2014
memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the disregard of
federal law concerning use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana is relevant in national
security determinations regardless of changes to state laws concerning marijuana use. 
Here, the written record shows Applicant engaged in drug abuse by using
marijuana on a periodic or occasional basis during the years of 2004–2014; he also
 AG ¶ 25(g). 23
 AG ¶ 26(a)–(d).24
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).25
5
purchased marijuana during the same period. Moreover, he expressed, in both his
security clearance application and in his answer to the SOR, an intention to continue
using marijuana.  His involvement with marijuana reflects negatively on his judgment,23
reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.   
There are four mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H, although only
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case.  I considered both,24
and they are not sufficient to mitigate the security concern. The mitigating condition in
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because his illegal drug involvement was not so long ago
and was not so infrequent that it is no longer a concern. The mitigating condition in  AG
¶ 26(b) does not apply because he did not present sufficient evidence to demonstrate
an intention not to abuse marijuana in the future. For example, he did not submit
evidence of negative drug tests to confirm that he has abstained from marijuana use
since April 2014. And he did not submit a signed statement of intent not to abuse any
drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Because Applicant chose to have his case decided without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate his demeanor. Limited to the written record, I am unable to assess
Applicant’s sincerity, candor, or truthfulness. He also chose not to respond to the FORM
with relevant and material facts about his circumstances, which may have helped to
rebut, extenuate, mitigate, or explain the security concern. 
Applicant’s involvement with marijuana justifies current doubt about his judgment,
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this
conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept.  I also weighed the evidence as a25
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or
vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude he did not meet his  ultimate burden of persuasion to
show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for
access to classified information.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge  
