 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-07039 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 24, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on September 21, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on September 29, 2015. He responded with a letter and a 
document that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (Ex) A and B. The case was assigned 
to me on November 5, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A 
and B are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served in the U.S. military reserve from 2002 until 
he was honorably discharged in 2009. He has a bachelor’s degree. As of 2013, when 
he submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), he had not 
married, and he had no children.1   
 
The SOR alleges fourteen delinquent student loans totaling about $58,824, three 
miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $2,281, and that Applicant did not “file 
and/or pay, as required, [his] federal tax returns for tax years 2009 and 2010.”   
 
Applicant admitted all the student-loan SOR allegations, but it appears that 
several of the accounts are duplicates. The most accurate figure appears to be the eight 
delinquent student loans totaling $30,661, as listed by Experian on the January 2013 
combined credit report. In July 2009, the U.S. Department of Education began 
garnishing $227 from Applicant’s wages every two weeks. The balance due on his 
student loans at that time was $45,634. As of December 2010, the balance had been 
reduced to $41,133. As of August 2015, the balance had been reduced to $22,331.2  
 
In August 2015, Applicant accepted an offer from the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 
1.f to settle a $1,181 debt (alleged in the SOR and listed in the credit reports as a 
$1,558 debt) for $1,103, payable through a $200 payment, followed by four monthly 
$225 payments. As of October 2015, when he responded to the FORM, Applicant had 
made the first three payments. He paid the $200 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g 
in August 2015. He paid the $523 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h in October 
2015.3 
 
Applicant admitted that he did not pay his 2009 and 2010 federal income taxes 
when they were due, but there is no evidence that he failed to file his returns in a timely 
manner. Applicant listed on his 2013 SF 86 that he owed the IRS about $2,800 for the 
two tax years. He submitted documentation from the IRS that his 2009 and 2010 taxes 
are paid in full.4 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 2-7; AE A.  
 
3 Items 2-7; AE A, B.  
 
4 Items 2-4; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant admitted that his financial problems resulted from being “young and 
dumb,” but he has been working on resolving them for several years. He paid debts that 
were not alleged in the SOR. He is using the “snowball” method of addressing his 
finances by paying his smaller debts first, and then moving on to his larger debts. His 
student loans have been paid by garnishment since 2009. Once his last debt is paid, he 
plans on voluntarily paying an additional amount to get his student loans out of default 
status. 5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
5 Items 2-7.  
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. There is 
no evidence that Applicant failed to file his 2009 and 2010 federal income taxes when 
they were due. AG ¶ 19(g) is not applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant paid his 2009 and 2010 federal taxes. He has been paying his student 
loans through garnishment since 2009, reducing the amount owed from $45,634 to 
$22,331. He paid two of the remaining three debts and paid three of the five payments 
due on the last debt by the time he responded to the FORM. He also paid debts that 
were not alleged in the SOR. He plans on voluntarily increasing his student loan 
payments once his last debt is paid. 
 
  I find that Applicant established a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he 
took significant action to implement that plan. He made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are 
under control. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because Applicant 
is still in the process of paying his debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
