 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05737 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth Rowland, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant continues to consume alcohol, at times to intoxication, despite being 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent and completing three alcohol detoxification treatments, 
two alcohol rehabilitation programs, and counseling with a therapist. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and explained why it was 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on March 3, 2015, and he requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. On 
July 21, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. On July 23, 2015, I scheduled a hearing for August 19, 2015. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Six Government exhibits (GEs 1-6) and two 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-B) were admitted into evidence without any objections. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in the hearing transcript (Tr.) received on August 27, 2015. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
  
 The SOR alleges under Guideline G that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to 
excess and to intoxication, from the age of 15 to at least December 2014, when he was 
hospitalized for two days of alcohol treatment (SOR ¶ 1.a). The SOR also alleges that 
Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence while in treatment with a mental health 
provider from March 2010 through April 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and during hospitalizations for 
alcohol treatment in March 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.c), February 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.d), and May 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant admitted the allegations with some explanations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations are accepted and incorporated as findings 
of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old structural designer, who has been employed by the same 
defense contractor since June 1982, except for a layoff in 2006. He worked as a carpenter 
for his first 15 years on the job. (GEs 1-3, 5.) He has held a DOD secret security clearance 
since August 2002. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife married in June 1984, separated in May 2011, and 
divorced in late 2013. (GEs 1, 4; Tr. 32.) They had a son in 1987 and a daughter in 1989. 
(GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse. He began drinking alcohol at age 15 
in quantity of a half pint of brandy once a week on Fridays. (Tr. 41.) Around age 17, 
Applicant started consuming alcohol on a daily basis, from two to eight beers a day. He 
drank to intoxication about twice monthly. He refrained from drinking any alcohol for 
approximately nine months during the late 1980s, to show his then spouse that he could 
abstain. His alcohol consumption increased over time to where it caused significant marital 
difficulties. (GEs 3, 5.) 
 
 After drinking a pint of vodka per day for months, Applicant self-referred for inpatient 
alcohol detoxification treatment at a hospital (hereafter hospital X) on May 26, 2006, at the 
urging of his spouse. (Tr. 29.) He was unemployed after being laid off in March 2006 and 
 
 3 
not coping well with his unstructured time. Following an uneventful detoxification, Applicant 
transitioned to the hospital’s ambulatory drug and alcohol rehabilitation program for 
treatment of diagnosed alcohol dependence on May 28, 2006. He received counseling, 
participated in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and took Antabuse. He was discharged on 
June 5, 2006, condition improved, to follow up with individual outpatient therapy. (GE 5.) 
Applicant was advised to stop drinking. (Tr. 29, 33.)  
 
 Applicant abstained from alcohol for about nine months. After his spouse wrongly 
accused him of drinking, he became aggravated and turned to alcohol. (Tr. 35.) He testified 
that he drank beer (Tr. 36), but medical records report that he drank about a pint of 
whiskey a day for the next 2.5 years. (GE 4.) 
 
 In mid-February 2010, Applicant sought medical care for abdominal pain and 
spasms. The physician on duty advised that he obtain alcohol detoxification. (Tr. 37.) On 
February 15, 2010, Applicant was admitted for alcohol detoxification to hospital Y. He 
reported no blackouts but admitted that he had morning tremors.
1
 Diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent, Applicant tolerated the detoxification protocol and was assessed as clinically 
stable at discharge on February 18, 2010. (GE 6.) Applicant elected not to follow-up in 
hospital Y’s 12-step program because “it was more drug addicts there just for drugs.” (Tr. 
39.) 
 
 On February 24, 2010, Applicant admitted himself for alcohol rehabilitation 
treatment in a partial hospitalization program at hospital X. Diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence on admission, Applicant reported efforts to change his routines to avoid 
drinking but also urges to drink alcohol. At discharge on March 2, 2010, he was diagnosed 
with alcohol dependence and with depressive disorder, not otherwise specified. His insight 
and judgment were assessed as limited, but improving. He was sober while in treatment, 
but had not been fully engaged in his recovery. He saw his alcohol problem as not as bad 
as others and believed that he could will himself to abstain from using alcohol. (GE 5.) 
Applicant did not attend a 12-step program after his discharge. (Tr. 47.)  
 
 Applicant needed a psychiatric consult for his insurer to cover the costs of his 
alcohol program. On March 12, 2010, he was evaluated by an independent licensed clinical 
social worker (LICSW) in a private mental health practice.
2
 The LICSW diagnosed 
Applicant with alcohol dependence and depression. He recommended psychotherapy to 
work on relapse prevention skills and involvement in a 12-step program. Applicant began 
individual counseling with the LICSW for his alcohol dependency problem, weekly in March 
2010 and then twice a month from April 2010. Applicant attended AA only once, which was 
early in his psychotherapy. There are no records in evidence of counseling with the LICSW 
between July 7, 2010, and November 3, 2010, when Applicant reported an increase in 
                                                 
1 
Applicant sought alcohol detoxification on medical advice. He testified that he was having tremors, which he 
attributes not to alcohol but to “a lot of different diseases” caused by working with air tools and jackhammers. 
(Tr. 38.) 
 
2 
Applicant testified that he was required by his medical insurer to see a psychiatrist and that he began his 
counseling on his first discharge from hospital X. Available treatment records (GE 4) do not confirm any 
treatment before March 2010, which was after his second program at hospital X. 
 
 4 
work-related stress and anxiety. (GE 4.) Applicant had received a written warning at work 
for poor attendance in October 2010 (GE 1), but there is no indication that alcohol was 
involved. 
 
 Available therapy and medication management progress notes from November 
2010 to January 2011 show improvement in Applicant’s mental health from his 
psychopharmacological treatment and individual psychotherapy. The evidentiary record 
includes no counseling records after January 7, 2011, until April 13, 2011, when Applicant 
reported “thoughts of drinking” to his therapist. As of May 4, 2011, his alcohol problem was 
considered in remission in that he had not relapsed into drinking. (GE 4.) 
 
 Marital discord led to Applicant moving from the marital home in late May 2011 and 
to his ex-wife filing for divorce around October 2011. (GE 3.) After being injured at work in 
mid-April 2012, Applicant was placed on medical leave. During a counseling session with 
his therapist on May 25, 2012, Applicant was angry about being out of work. He “felt like 
drinking,’ but he stayed away from alcohol. On June 22, 2012, he reported to his therapist 
increased urges to drink alcohol after his worker’s compensation claim was denied. (GE 4.) 
 
 Around mid-July 2012, Applicant had increased anxiety at not being medically 
cleared to return to work and because of his impending divorce. In September 2012, 
Applicant had a favorable resolution to a pay dispute with his employer over his 
compensation during his lengthy medical leave. Yet, conflict with his now ex-wife over 
financial issues delayed their divorce. During a session for medication management on 
December 28, 2012, Applicant was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder and 
depression. (GE 4.) There is no evidence that Applicant was formally discharged from his 
therapy at that point, but the record also does not show that Applicant continued in his 
therapy after December 2012. 
 
 Applicant relapsed into drinking alcohol in late January 2013, following the death of 
his mother. (GE 3; Tr. 40-41.) He started drinking a couple of beers and two nips of 
whiskey at a sitting two or three nights a week. (Tr. 42-43.) He drank more on the 
weekends, about six beers in a day (“like a beer an hour or a beer every two hours”). (Tr. 
44-45.) Applicant was still out of work as of his last documented session with his 
psychiatrist on April 9, 2013. His psychiatrist noted “controlled ETOH”
3
 and diagnosed 
Applicant with depression. (GE 4.) Applicant does not now know when or why he ended 
this therapeutic relationship. (Tr. 47-48.) He has not taken any psychiatric medications in 
two years. (Tr. 57.) 
 
 Around September 2013, Applicant returned to work with the defense contractor. 
(GE 3.) On September 10, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his secret 
                                                 
3 
ETOH is an acronym for ethyl alcohol, the intoxicating ingredient found in all alcoholic beverages. See 
www.medilexicon.com; https://www.nim.nih.gov. It is unclear whether the psychiatrist meant by “controlled 
ETOH” that Applicant’s alcohol problem was in control or alternatively that Applicant was controlling his alcohol 
intake. 
 
 5 
clearance. Applicant listed voluntary alcohol counseling at hospital X in 2006 and at 
hospital Y in 2010. (GE 1.) 
 
 On October 3, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant indicated that he has been in 
counseling with a LICSW since 2009 [sic] because he felt underappreciated at work;
4
 that 
he voluntarily sought inpatient alcohol treatment at hospital X in 2006 in an attempt to 
reduce his alcohol consumption; and that he had five days of outpatient alcohol counseling 
at the hospital in June 2010 [sic] on medical advice. Applicant reported that he has been 
consuming from two to eight beers a day since he was age 17, except that he abstained for 
about nine months 25 years ago to show his wife that he could abstain. Applicant admitted 
that twice monthly he consumed alcohol to intoxication, which for him took six or more 
beers. Applicant expressed intent to continue drinking alcohol at his current rate as he 
believed he does not have an alcohol problem. (GE 3.) 
 
 On October 21, 2013, the OPM investigator asked Applicant for further clarification 
on some issues, including about his treatment at hospital Y in 2010. Applicant indicated 
that he voluntarily sought the treatment, which consisted of 12-step work and group 
counseling, in an attempt to fix his marriage. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant underwent alcohol detoxification treatment at hospital X for three days in 
December 2014. He testified that he had “a lot of time doing nothing” during a work 
shutdown and drank in quantity up to eight beers at a sitting. He called his ex-wife and she 
took him to the hospital. (GE 3; Tr. 46, 48, 60.) He declined recommended aftercare 
because he had completed the hospital’s 12-step program in the past. He was very familiar 
with the program and so knew what he should be doing. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol, against clinical advice, after his alcohol 
detoxification treatment in 2014. (Tr. 49.) He self-medicates with alcohol “to release the 
pressure.” (Tr. 51-52.) He drinks alcohol primarily on the weekends. “Every once in a 
while,” including as recently as early August 2015, he consumes up to eight beers over 
eight hours while at a campground. (Tr. 60-62.) While watching a sporting event on 
television on August 16, 2015, Applicant drank enough alcohol to exceed the legal limit for 
safe driving. (Tr. 50.) He does not believe that his alcohol consumption has ever posed a 
security threat. (Tr. 30, 54-56.) Applicant has never had any alcohol-related incidents on or 
off the job. (Tr. 50.) He admits that he suffered an alcohol-related blackout “a couple of 
times.” Applicant considers his current alcohol consumption to be average. (Tr. 55.) He 
does not drink before reporting for work. (Tr. 58.) 
  
 Applicant’s union representative has known Applicant for about 18 years. He attests 
to Applicant being a conscientious worker and person of integrity. (AE B.) A design 
supervisor, who had worked closely with Applicant for about four years as of March 2015, 
found Applicant to be calm under pressure, approachable, and concerned with the quality 
                                                 
4 
Applicant apparently told the OPM investigator that he was still in counseling under the supervision of his 
therapist. (GE 3.) However, progress notes from the practice fail to corroborate any sessions with the LICSW 
after December 28, 2012, or with his psychiatrist after April 9, 2013. (GE 4.) 
 
 6 
of his work. Applicant has consistently displayed honesty and trustworthiness when 
carrying out his duties. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
 7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant started drinking at age 15, about a half pint of brandy on Friday nights. 
Around 1976, he began drinking alcohol daily, including to intoxication about twice a 
month. By the late 1980s, his drinking was apparently of such concern to his now ex-wife 
that Applicant stopped drinking for nine months to prove to her that he could abstain. 
However, by 2006 he had developed a serious alcohol problem. After drinking a pint of 
vodka daily for several months, Applicant underwent voluntary treatment for diagnosed 
alcohol dependence from May 26, 2006, to June 5, 2006. Advised to stop drinking, 
Applicant abstained for about nine months before relapsing in 2007 out of anger at his then 
wife, who had accused him of drinking. He reports that he drank beer, but medical records 
indicate that he consumed about a pint of whiskey per day for the next 2.5 years. In 
February 2010, he underwent alcohol detoxification on medical advice and completed an 
intensive outpatient program for alcohol dependence. With individual counseling from a 
therapist and pharmacological management monitored by a psychiatrist, Applicant 
consumed no alcohol from February 2010 through December 2012. Yet, shortly after his 
last psychotherapy session of record, Applicant relapsed in January 2013 when his mother 
died. 
 
 As of his OPM interview in October 2013, Applicant was drinking two to eight beers 
a day and becoming intoxicated twice a month. During a work shutdown in December 
2014, he admitted himself for alcohol detoxification. Despite being advised to abstain 
completely from alcohol, he continued to drink on the weekends after that detoxification 
effort, in quantity ranging from a couple of beers at home to as many as eight beers when 
at a campground. Applicant consumed approximately six beers on the Sunday preceding 
his security clearance hearing, and he exhibited no desire or intent to change his drinking 
habits. While his abusive drinking has not caused him legal or work problems, doubts arise 
about his ability to adhere to his security responsibilities on those occasions when he is 
intoxicated or has an alcohol-related blackout. He admitted having a couple of alcohol-
related blackouts, although he was not specific about the time or circumstances. Under AG 
¶ 22, four disqualifying conditions are established to a greater or lesser extent: 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosed by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence; 
 
 8 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant engaged in habitual binge consumption when he drank a pint of whiskey 
per day against medical advice for some 2.5 years after he completed an alcohol program 
at hospital X in 2006. His drinking of eight beers to intoxication, including on occasion 
during the summer of 2015, would also implicate AG ¶ 22(c). Applicant has been 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence by several medical providers. Both AG ¶¶ 22(d) and 
22(e) apply. His relapses from 2007 to February 2010 and from January 2013 to at least 
August 2015 followed alcohol rehabilitation treatment, so AG ¶ 22(f) is clearly established. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 apply. Applicant’s ongoing 
consumption of alcohol against medical advice, at times to intoxication, removes AG ¶ 
23(a) from serious consideration. AG ¶ 23(a) provides: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 The voluntariness of Applicant’s alcohol treatments is a factor in his favor, although 
his motivation for his treatment in 2006 was to improve his relationship with his spouse and 
not to deal with an acknowledged alcohol problem. In 2010, he sought medical care for 
abdominal spasms and was advised to seek alcohol treatment. He recognized that he 
needed alcohol detoxification after drinking to excess during a work shutdown in December 
2014. Yet, he declined to participate in another alcohol rehabilitation program at hospital X 
because he had already been through the program. He chooses not to abstain from 
alcohol and does not believe he has an alcohol problem. While there is some evidence of 
positive actions taken to overcome his alcohol problem, I cannot apply AG ¶ 23(b), which 
provides: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible 
use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
Furthermore, without professional counseling or even AA to ensure that his alcohol 
consumption does not get out of control, Applicant does not benefit from either AG ¶ 23(c), 
“the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment 
program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress,” or AG ¶ 23(d): 
 
 9 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
When viewed in its totality, Applicant’s abusive relationship with alcohol is well established 
and not mitigated under Guideline G. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
5
 Applicant’s many years of productive work for his defense contractor employer weigh 
in his favor under the whole-person assessment. The DOD seeks to encourage those 
employees with security clearance to seek treatment when needed. At the same time, the 
DOD has a legitimate expectation that the employee will commit himself or herself to 
recovery. 
 
Applicant’s extensive history of alcohol abuse with multiple alcohol detoxification 
and treatments raises significant security risks. His ongoing consumption of alcohol, at 
times to intoxication, presents an unacceptable risk of future impairment inconsistent with 
the good judgment that must be required of persons with access to classified information. It 
is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990). After considering 
all the facts and circumstances, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance at this time. 
                                                 
5
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 10 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.e: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
