 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-06448 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On March 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2 
 
 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
On April 23, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 2, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 6, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 7, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into evidence 
without objection.  
 
Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and did not offer any exhibits. I 
held the record open until July 24, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE A through AE G, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On July 15, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old program manager employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2014. He seeks a security clearance as a condition of his continued 
employment. (GE 1; Tr. 16-17)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1987. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in electrical engineering in May 1993. He was previously married 
from July 1993 to October 2001. That marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in 
June 2003. Applicant has a 21-year-old emancipated daughter and a 17-year-old 
stepdaughter from his first marriage. He also has a 12-year-old daughter from his 
second marriage. Applicant’s stepdaughter from his previous marriage lives with him 
and his wife. Applicant’s wife works fulltime as a probation officer. Applicant did not 
serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 17-22) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 11 debts ranging from an $82 charged-off medical 
account to a $21,849 charged-off automobile loan. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.k; Tr. 31; GE 3, 
GE 4)  Details regarding those 11 debts and their status follow. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties stem from periods of unemployment or 
underemployment. He was unemployed from November 2008 to December 2009, 
 
3 
 
 
from January 2010 to February 2010, and from September 2012 to February 2013. 
From March 2013 to December 2013, he was significantly underemployed. (GE 1, GE 
2; Tr. 24-29, 31-33) During Applicant’s employment from March 2013 to December 
2013, his hourly rate was $22 an hour in contrast to his previous employment when he 
was making $56 an hour. (SOR answer) 
 
Applicant has initiated a plan to regain financial responsibility. He contacted his 
employee assistance program and was provided with several referrals. Applicant 
retained a certified financial planner to help him develop a comprehensive and 
systematic plan to address his outstanding debts. Before that, he had consulted with a 
bank to determine whether he qualified for a consolidation loan and was informed that 
option was not available to him.  (Tr. 42-43, 45-48; AE A – B, AE F) 
 
Applicant’s debt consolidation plan was presented in matrix format that listed 
the name of creditor, corresponding SOR allegation, amount owed to each creditor, 
payment date, projected payoff date, number of payments, and amount of payment. 
Applicant’s budget demonstrates that he maintains a modest lifestyle and lives within 
his means. He has a net monthly remainder of $206.  (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1.j) (AE A – AE B, 
AE C, Tr. 29, Tr-41-42) One of Applicant’s debts, a past-due amount of $641 for an 
automobile loan, has been paid off. One of his larger debts, a student loan, is in 
forbearance. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.k; Tr. 33-40; AE C, AE G) 
  
 To help reduce his family expenditures, Applicant advised that his teenage 
daughter will be getting a job, and she will pay for her automobile expenses. Applicant 
stated that if he gets his clearance, he will receive a $105 monthly salary increase that 
he will apply towards his debts. He registered for an on-line debt reduction class and 
will follow up with his certified financial planner on an as needed basis. (AE F) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant has spent the majority his adult working life working for defense 
contractors on defense-related projects. During his career, he received numerous 
awards and commendations, and received four performance-related “SPOT” awards 
from two different employers. (SOR answer) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
 
4 
 
 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented by the evidence establishing 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
   
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a), because his debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted as a result of Applicant’s 
unemployment and underemployment, which could not have been anticipated. During 
this time, Applicant remained in contact with creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) is fully applicable. 
Applicant received financial counseling and his financial problems are being resolved 
and under control. AG ¶ 20(d) is also fully applicable. Applicant has taken reasonable 
steps to regains financial responsibility. Most notably, he has benefited from the 
counsel he received from his certified financial planner. All of Applicant’s debts are 
resolved or being resolved.1 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant because he did not dispute his 
responsibility for any SOR debts. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside [his or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether [he or she] maintained contact with [his or her] creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep [his or her] debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
    
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s financial conduct. Credit 
reports submitted by the Government document his SOR delinquent accounts. This 
process has no doubt made an impression on Applicant and he now demonstrates the 
need to exercise diligence when monitoring one’s credit. 
 
The mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. There is no evidence of any security violations. Applicant 
is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. His current financial 
problems were caused by factors beyond his control. Applicant’s employment in the 
defense industry weighs heavily in his favor. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, 
lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant has achieved some important educational and employment goals, 
demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. He holds a bachelor of 
science degree in electrical engineering. Applicant is making a significant contribution 
to the defense industry and has received recognition for his contributions from his 
employers. I specifically considered Applicant’s financial responsibility before falling 
into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial difficulties, his financial recovery, 
the steps he has taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential for future service 
as a defense contractor, and his testimony and demeanor. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve his debts and maintain 
his financial responsibility.2 
    
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through 
credit reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to 
reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). 
Violation of a promise made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns 
under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge 
does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority 
to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow [him] the opportunity to 
have a security clearance while [he] works on [his] financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply 
that this Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
