 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-06422 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges and the record establishes that 
Applicant used marijuana about five times from September 2002 to August 2010. One 
marijuana use was after he completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) and he received a security clearance. He self-reported his 
marijuana use. His company has enrolled him in a drug-testing program. He does not 
associate with drug-using associates and contacts; he avoids the environment where 
drugs were used; and he provided a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. Drug involvement and personal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On September 10, 2009, and January 23, 2011, Applicant completed and signed 
two SF 86s. (GE 1; GE 2) On May 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
                                         
 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under AGs H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct).  
  
On June 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 14, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 27, 2015, 
the case was assigned to me. On December 9, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for January 11, 
2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered three exhibits and Applicant offered seven exhibits. (Transcript (Tr.) 21-
22, 24-28; GE 1-3; AE A-G) There were no objections, except Applicant objected to 
admission of his Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM 
PSI), and he provided clarifications and corrections to his OPM PSI. (Tr. 22, 28, 32-49) 
His clarifications were accepted as amending his OPM PSI, and all proffered exhibits 
were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 22, 28, 49) On January 19, 2016, I received a 
transcript of the hearing. On January 26, 2016, I received two exhibits, which were 
admitted without objection. (AE H-I)   
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations, and he also 
provided some extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old engineer, who is seeking to retain his security 
clearance. (Tr. 6) The same defense contractor has employed him since November 
2009. (Tr. 10) In 1977, he graduated from high school, and in 1983, he received a 
bachelor of science degree in civil engineering. (Tr. 7) In 2004, he was awarded a 
master’s degree in business administration. (Tr. 8-9) In 2010 and 2013, he received 
important work-related certifications. (AE D; AE E)  
 
In 1983, Applicant married, and in 1992, he divorced. (Tr. 8-10; GE 1) In 1992, 
he married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 10; GE 1; GE 2) He has never 
served in the military. (Tr. 10; GE 1; GE 2) 
 
Personal Conduct and Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately twice while he was in high school and 
once while he was in college. (Tr. 50) He held a security clearance with another defense 
contractor from 1983 to 1995, and he did not use marijuana during those 12 years. (Tr. 
51) 
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
                                         
 
When Applicant completed his September 10, 2009 SF 86, he was asked about 
illegal drug use in the previous seven years, and he said he used marijuana from about 
September 2002 to about December 2007 on less than five occasions when he in 
Canada. (GE 1) When Applicant completed his January 23, 2011 SF 86, he was again 
asked about illegal drug use in the previous seven years, and he said he used 
marijuana from about September 2003 to about August 2010 on less than five 
occasions and only once in the previous three years. (GE 2)  
 
In 2002 Applicant and his supervisor were in a European country for two days. 
(Tr. 35-37) Applicant received marijuana and mushrooms from his supervisor, and he 
used the substances with his supervisor. (Tr. 35-37, 44-45, 73-74) He has not 
associated with the supervisor who provided marijuana and mushrooms to him since 
2008. (Tr. 74)   
 
When Applicant went to Canada, he visited his sister-in-law. (Tr. 32) On two to 
four occasions, she offered marijuana to Applicant and he took a couple of puffs “to be 
polite.” (Tr. 33, 41, 52-53) On all occasions except one, he did not consume enough 
marijuana to feel any effect from it. (Tr. 38) On one occasion he felt relaxed and tired. 
(Tr. 39) He has not visited his sister-in-law’s residence in Canada since 2007. (Tr. 61) 
 
In August 2010, Applicant had an interim security clearance. (Tr. 81) Applicant’s 
stepdaughter’s friend invited Applicant and his spouse to use marijuana with his 
stepdaughter and her friend at Applicant’s residence. (Tr. 30-31, 56) He took two puffs 
on the marijuana cigarette to show that he was a “cool step dad” and to improve his 
relationship with her. (Tr. 31, 58) He did not consider the consequences of his conduct, 
and he acknowledged his marijuana use was wrong. (Tr. 32, 40, 66, 79) His employer 
prohibits marijuana use. (Tr. 58-59) He did not truly appreciate the security significance 
of using marijuana while holding a security clearance. (Tr. 62-64) He does not intend to 
use illegal drugs in the future so long as he holds a security clearance or marijuana 
continues to be illegal. (Tr. 41-42, 48, 68) No one has used marijuana at his residence 
since August 2010. (Tr. 56) He does not associate with any illegal drug users. (Tr. 74) 
Applicant’s stepdaughter’s friend has not returned to his residence and he does not 
associate with her. (Tr. 75) 
 
On December 31, 2015, Applicant submitted to a urinalysis test, which was 
negative for illegal drugs. (Tr. 59-60; AE G) Applicant’s employer has placed him on a 
random drug testing program at Applicant’s request to show his abstinence from illegal 
drug use. (Tr. 88; AE H)    
 
Applicant provided a signed statement of intent not to use marijuana or any other 
illegal drug with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. (Tr. 88) He stated: 
 
I, [Applicant’s name], intend never to use marijuana or any other illegal 
drug in the future. I intend never to misuse prescription drugs or 
nonprescription medications. I understand that any future violation will 
result in the automatic revocation of my security clearance. (AE I) 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
Character Evidence 
 
On June 3, 2015, Applicant’s spouse was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (AE B) 
She describes him as generous, responsible, diligent, loyal, responsible, and dedicated. 
(AE A) She and Applicant do not use illegal drugs. (AE A) He received excellent 
evaluations from his current employer. (AE F) 
   
Policies 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
This decision is not based, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. Thus, any decision to deny a security 
clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
                                         
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse”;2 “(c) illegal drug possession”; and “(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply because Applicant used 
marijuana about eight times over his lifetime, and about five times from September 2002 
to August 2010. He possessed marijuana before he used it. His most recent marijuana 
use was after he completed an SF 86, and he received a security clearance.3  
Consideration of mitigating conditions is required.  
 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances.  
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are 
contained in 21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. 
See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement 
of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. He did not provide 
proof of satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
 
7 
                                         
 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.    
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). 
 
Applicant recognized the adverse impact on his authorization to have continued 
access to classified information additional marijuana use will have. There is no evidence 
of marijuana use after August 2010. He said he intends to continue to abstain from 
illegal drug possession and use. He does not associate with marijuana users, and he 
does not frequent the environment where illegal drugs are used. He provided a signed 
statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. Applicant disclosed his marijuana use to his employer; he requested to be 
placed on a drug-testing program; and his employer has agreed to randomly test 
Applicant for illegal drugs. His marijuana use while holding a security clearance was 
more than five years ago, and no longer casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. The only evidence of Applicant’s marijuana use is 
his disclosures during the security clearance process. He credibly described his 
marijuana use, and he sincerely promised not to use marijuana in the future. He has 
abstained from marijuana use for more than five years, demonstrating a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to mitigate drug involvement security concerns.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
8 
                                         
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; or (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
Marijuana possession and use as well as marijuana use while holding a security 
clearance are thoroughly addressed under Guideline H, and accordingly, AG ¶ 16(c) 
does not apply. AG ¶ 16(e)(2) does not apply because the SOR does not allege 
Applicant’s marijuana or mushroom use in locations outside of the United States. 
  
AG ¶¶ 16(d)(1), 16(d)(3), and 16(e)(1) apply because Applicant used marijuana 
on about five occasions from September 2002 through August 2010. His marijuana use 
in August 2010 was while holding a security clearance. His marijuana use reflects 
adversely on his professionalism and creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Marijuana use while holding a security clearance reflects 
“questionable judgment . . . or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [and 
raises] raise questions about [his] reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.” See AG ¶ 15.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides four potentially applicable personal conduct mitigating 
conditions in this case:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
9 
                                         
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g) apply. The disqualifying conduct alleged in 
the SOR under Guidelines H and E is identical. The mitigating facts discussed under 
Guideline H are applicable to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. His most 
recent marijuana use was in August 2010, and happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Appellant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He disclosed his marijuana use to his 
company and security officials, and he is not vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old engineer, who has been employed by the same 
defense contractor since November 2009. In 1983, he received a bachelor of science 
degree in civil engineering. In 2004, he was awarded a master’s degree in business 
 
10 
                                         
 
administration, and in 2010 and 2013, he received important work-related certifications. 
He has received some excellent evaluations from his employer.   
 
Applicant expressed sincere regret for his history of marijuana use, especially 
while holding a security clearance. He ended his marijuana use in August 2010, and his 
marijuana use is not recent. He sincerely assures he will not use marijuana in the future.  
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
