 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00874 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his omissions in his 2013 security clearance application were not 
deliberate. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F and Guideline E security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 30, 
2013. On April 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 26, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated August 14, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on September 1, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM or submit any information.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 1.e through 
1.j, 1.l through 1.r, and 2.a and 2.b. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.k (because there was 
no creditor contact information), 1.s (disputed), and 1.t (duplicate of 1.b). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old warehouseman employed by a federal contractor. He 
graduated from high school in June 1991, enlisted in his state’s Air National Guard in 
August 1992, and has been serving to present. He married his wife in March 1998. This 
is his first security clearance application. (2013 SCA) 
 
Applicant’s employment record shows that he served on active duty between 
January 2005 and June 2006. He worked for a company as a forklift operator from June 
2006 to September 2009. He served on active duty from September 2009 to December 
2010. He returned to work as a forklift operator from December 2010 to January 2012. 
Applicant has been working for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
February 2012. During this period, he has been deployed to a South Asia nation in 
support of U.S. personnel deployed overseas. (2013 SCA) 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2013 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether he had any financial problems, including delinquent or in collection debts; loan 
defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; and whether he 
was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. Applicant answered “no” to all 
these questions and deliberately failed to disclose the delinquent accounts alleged in 
the SOR.  
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the 20 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $18,826. Most of the SOR 
allegations are established by Applicant’s admissions and the FORM credit reports. 
Apparently, between December 2010 and January 2012, Applicant was underemployed 
and overextended himself financially. He claimed that he was not aware that he had to 
disclose all of his delinquent accounts, and averred his omissions were unintentional.  
 
Applicant made payments towards the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 
1.i, 1.j, 1.m, and 1.p. The April 2015 credit report shows that Applicant paid SOR ¶ 1.l. 
(FORM, Item 6) Additionally, some accounts had no balance due, or showed a reduced 
balance when compared to the balance reflected on the 2013 credit report. (FORM, 
 
3 
 
 
Item 5) I find that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is alleged twice (SOR ¶ 1.t), and 
both allegations will be consolidated under SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in 
financial counseling or whether he follows a budget. Although he claimed in his answer 
to the SOR that he established numerous payment agreements, he presented no 
documentary evidence of any payment agreements made, efforts to contact creditors, 
or efforts to otherwise resolve his financial problems. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2013 SCA as 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to explain 
or mitigate the security concerns raised by his omissions. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
 
4 
 
 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debts raises the applicability of the following 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts were recent, frequent, and not incurred under circumstances making 
them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant’s presented insufficient evidence of periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, or other facts that could establish circumstances beyond his control 
that may have contributed or aggravated his financial problems. Nor did Applicant 
submit evidence to show he acted responsibly under the circumstances to warrant 
applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). Further, Applicant presented no evidence to show he 
obtained financial counseling and has gained a better grasp of his financial situation. 
 
 Applicant received credit for resolving eight of the SOR allegations. 
Notwithstanding, it appears that these payments were made after receipt of the SOR. 
As such, the evidence is insufficient to show that he initiated good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in 
financial counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient 
to establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that 
his financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish 
that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2013 SCA when he 
failed to disclose his financial problems. Considering the number of debts, the dates the 
 
6 
 
 
accounts became delinquent, and the period during which the debts have been 
delinquent, Applicant knew or should have known of his delinquent accounts. I note that 
Applicant has been in the service since 1992, and holds the rank of staff sergeant. In 
light of his service and work experience, he knew or should have known that he was 
required to be truthful, honest, and forthcoming when completing his SCA. Applicant 
failed to submit sufficient evidence to mitigate or explain his omissions. In light of the 
available evidence, I find his omissions were deliberate and with the intent to conceal 
the information or to mislead the Government. 
 
  Applicant’s falsification of his 2013 SCA triggers the applicability the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
7 
 
 
 The above mitigating conditions are not sufficiently raised by the facts and 
circumstances of this case and are not applicable. Personal conduct concerns 
are not mitigated. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years of service in the Air National Guard, and 
his work for federal contractors in support of deployed U.S. personnel. Notwithstanding, 
he failed to submit sufficient evidence to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his omissions were not made with the intent to falsify his SCA or 
mislead the Government. He failed to mitigate the Guidelines F and E security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.e,    
  1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.p, and 1.t:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.f-1.h, 
  1.k, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.q-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
