                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )         ISCR Case No. 14-06517
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption. Eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On March 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 19, 2015, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on August 24, 2015, and did not respond to the FORM.  The
case was assigned to me on November 18, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly was arrested and charged with alcohol-
related offenses on three occasions between April 2010 and January 2014. He entered
guilty pleas on each of the charges, and was ordered to (a) attend an alcohol education
program and complete 30 hours of community service (subparagraph 1.a); (b) pay fines
and charges (subparagraph 1.b); and (c) receive 18 months of probation, pay fines and
restitution, and complete an alcohol evaluation and 25 hours of community service.
Additionally, Applicant allegedly received counseling in January and February 2014 at a
rehabilitation center, where he was diagnosed alcohol dependent and received a
recommendation to continue with his counseling and abstain from alcohol consumption.
In his response to the SOR, he admitted each of the alcohol-related incidents
with explanations. He claimed he was not drinking prior to being arrested in April 2010
for underage consumption of alcohol. Addressing the allegations in subparagraph 1.c,
he  claimed he is extremely unlikely to engage in physical violence again. And he
claimed he completed the outpatient program and recommended counseling sessions
after completing his treatment program, and established abstinence for three months
before returning to light drinking.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 24-year-old projects coordinator for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                               
Applicant is unmarried with no children. (Item 2) He earned a bachelor’s degree
from a recognized university in August 2013 (Item 3) and claims no military service. 
Alcohol-related incidents 
While in college, Applicant  typically consumed three beers a week and 24 beers
on weekends and would drink to intoxication twice a week. (Item 4) Between April 2010
and May 2012, while in college, Applicant was twice arrested for alcohol-related
incidents. (Items 1-3) In April 2010, he was arrested for underage consumption of
alcohol. Applicant and his roommate had invited people into their room where alcohol
was kept and was subsequently charged with having alcohol in his room at a time of
being underage, but not for drinking. (Item 2) He plead guilty to disorderly conduct
charges and was ordered to attend an alcohol education program and complete 30
3
hours of community service. (Items 2-4) By all accounts, Applicant completed his court-
ordered conditions. 
While still in college, Applicant was arrested for a second alcohol-related
incident. (Items 2-4) In May 2012, he was arrested and charged with public
drunkenness. He pleaded guilty to the charges and was ordered to pay fines and
charges. Records credit Applicant with satisfying the court’s imposed fines and charges.
In January 2014 (seven months following his graduation from college) Applicant
consumed alcohol to excess in a local tavern and got into a fight. For his role in the
fight, he was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct, public drunkenness,
recklessly endangering another person, and simple assault.  (Items 2-4) He pleaded
guilty to simple assault and was sentenced to 18 months of probation and was ordered
to pay fines and restitution; to complete a drug and alcohol evaluation; and to complete
25 hours of community service. Records document Applicant’s satisfaction of the
court’s probation conditions. (Items 2-4)
Applicant attributed his role in the 2014 fight to his own impaired judgment
associated with his excessive alcohol consumption. (Items 3 and 4) Thereafter, he
volunteered for alcohol counseling. He received alcohol counseling between January
2014 and February 2014, and from March 2014 to May 2014. During at least one of his
counseling sessions, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and assigned
recommendations to continue with his sessions and abstain from alcohol consumption.
(Items 2-4) Records document that Applicant adhered to these recommendations for
several months before abandoning his counseling sessions and returning to light
drinking. (Items 2-4) 
Currently, Applicant has no plans to discontinue his alcohol consumption or
resume counseling. (Items 2-4) Without any updated information from Applicant on his
current drinking status and dependence diagnosis, meaningful assessments of his
drinking status cannot be made.  At this time, it is still too early to make firm judgments
about his drinking. 
Endorsements
Applicant provided no character references on his behalf, either with his answer
or with his response to the FORM.  Nor did he furnish any performance evaluations or
evidence of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
4
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
          Alcohol consumption 
The concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
5
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant presents with a considerable history of alcohol-related arrests (three
in all) and related counseling. Between January 2014 and February 2014, he attended
outpatient sessions with substance abuse counselors who diagnosed him alcohol
dependent. 
Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s history of
alcohol-related offenses and alcohol dependency diagnosis. Applicant has provided
little detail about his diagnosis or updates about any changes.  After a brief period of
observed abstinence, he returned to drinking at reported light levels.  Whether his
continued drinking at any level poses risks to his recovery is unclear. Without an
updated professional evaluation by a licensed substance abuse counselor, safe
estimates cannot be made. Applicant’s recurrent history of alcohol abuse makes any
predictions about recurrence avoidance hazardous.
Applicant’s recurrent problems with abusive drinking and alcohol-related
arrests (three in all) over a compressed four-year period of time and associated
alcohol dependence diagnosis raise concerns over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.
On the strength of the evidence presented, three disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
AGs for alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” DC ¶
22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;” and DC ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or dependence.” 
6
Applicant accepted some of the recommendations of his counselors following his
last alcohol-related incident and attended continuing counseling sessions while
observing abstinence, but only for a very limited time of three months before
abandoning his counseling sessions and returning to light drinking. Without more
documented updates of his diagnosis and drinking patterns, meaningful assessments of
his drinking patterns and risks of recurrence of alcohol abuse cannot be made at this
time.
Applicant’s limited counseling and brief observance of abstinence after
completing his alcohol counseling sessions in 2014 entitle him to partial application of
MC ¶ 23(a) of Guideline G, “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” Applicant’s counseling sessions and resumption of drinking is too recent and
too uncertain to warrant any more than minimal application of MC ¶ 23(a).
Considering Applicant’s limited rehabilitation efforts over the past two years with
a still active alcohol dependence diagnosis and no favorable prognosis for continued
drinking, a sustained period precludes him from taking advantage of two potentially
applicable mitigating conditions: MC ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or her
alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser),” and MC ¶ 23(d), “the individual has successfully
completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required
aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” Too much
uncertainty exists about the quality and pace of Applicant’s recovery efforts to extend
any mitigation credit to Applicant at this time. 
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse and incidents away
from work, outpatient counseling and evaluations, and corresponding lack of convincing
probative evidence of a seasoned track record of generally sustained abstinence over
the past two years, the applicable guidelines, and a limited whole-person assessment of
his continued consumption of alcohol, even at reduced levels, it is still too early to make
safe predictions about his ability to continue drinking without an updated diagnosis and
favorable prognosis.
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
7
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTON): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:         Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
