 The case number listed on the SOR (14-07506) is a typographic error.1
 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-070561
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:  Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by her financial
problems. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied.
Statement of the Case
On April 24, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her2
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).3
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were4
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Department Counsel also provided a list identifying Gx. 1 - 5. It is included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.5
 Ax. A consists of the documents included with Applicant’s Answer. See Tr. 9 - 12. 6
2
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  3
On June 3, 2015, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative guideline
(AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR4
(Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2015,
and I convened a hearing on October 21, 2015. Department Counsel for the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5.5
Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A  - E. DOHA received the6
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $79,398 for 20
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.t). In response, Applicant denied, with
explanations, the debts at SOR 1.c - 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l - 1.n, and 1.p - 1.t. Applicant
admitted, with explanations, the remaining allegations. 
All of the debts alleged in the SOR are documented by credit reports produced
by the Government (Gx. 3 - 5), by Applicant’s disclosures in her admissions to the SOR,
in her EQIP (Gx. 1), and during a personal subject interview with a Government
investigator in May 2014 (Gx. 2). However, it was established at hearing that SOR 1.s
alleged the same debt as SOR 1.a, and that SOR 1.t alleged the same debt as SOR 1.f.
Applicant further established that the debt at SOR 1.f was not properly attributed to her
and has been resolved. (Ax. E) Accordingly, the allegations at SOR 1.f, 1.s, and 1.t are
concluded for Applicant, and the total amount of indebtedness at issue in this case is
$29,485. Based on all available information, I make the following additional findings of
fact.
Applicant is 48 years old. Since January 2013, she has been employed by a
defense contractor as a data preparation technician. Her job requires eligibility for a
position of trust because her employer supports management of the health care system
used by members of the military, and Applicant must be found suitable to be entrusted
with personally identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care system’s
constituents. Applicant has a good reputation at work. Her supervisor regards her as
“responsible, sincere, and trustworthy.” (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Ax. B)
3
Applicant was married from December 1993 until divorcing in October 2008. She
and her ex-husband had one child, who is now 20 years old and attending college.
Applicant remarried in October 2014. Her second husband was a mechanic, but is now
disabled and receiving about $600 weekly in state and federal benefits. (Answer; Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Tr. 72 - 73, 75 - 76, 80)
Applicant worked as an office manager in a non-governmental business from
April 2004 until December 2012. Applicant did not have health insurance during this
time. It was not until she started her current position in January 2013 that she had
effective medical insurance; however, her current medical insurance covers only eighty
percent of her medical costs. Applicant is responsible for the other twenty percent. (Gx.
2; Tr. 29 - 35, 37 - 38)
In May 2012, she was in a car accident caused by a drunk driver. Her car was
totaled and she broke her neck in two places. Applicant was unable to work for about 11
weeks and had no income during that time. She received a $35,000 settlement in
September 2012. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 42 - 44, 48 - 51)
When she submitted her EQIP, Applicant disclosed two past-due debts for
medical services. Subsequent credit reports obtained by Government investigators
documented the rest of the debts attributed to Applicant. This information served as the
basis for a discussion of her financial problems during Applicant’s May 2014 subject
interview with a Government investigator. During her subject interview, and in her
response to the SOR, Applicant stated that she would contact her creditors and make
arrangements to pay them to the extent her resources would allow. She presented
information at her hearing showing that the debt at SOR 1.f was for her ex-husband’s
vehicle loan and that the lien on that vehicle was satisfied and released in March 2014.
Applicant did not present any other information showing that she has contacted her
creditors or established repayment plans for any of her debts. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Ax. E; Tr. 74)
Applicant did not apply any of the $35,000 settlement funds to the resolution of
her medical bills, the single largest of which is $15,855, as alleged at SOR 1.g.
Applicant was aware of that debt when she received her settlement. Applicant used the
settlement proceeds to put a $7,000 down payment on a new car to replace the one that
was totaled in the car accident. She also claims to have paid a $1,000 medical bill,
which she did not otherwise identify. Applicant and her husband also received a refund
from their 2014 income taxes of about $5,848. None of that money was used to repay
any of her past-due medical bills, five of which (SOR 1.e, and 1.o - 1.q) are for less than
$100 each. Five other medical debts (SOR 1.j - 1.n) are for less than $200 each. (Gx. 2
- 5; Ax. C; Tr. 51 - 57, 65 - 66, 78, 81 - 82)
Applicant claimed that the $597 debt alleged at SOR 1.i for a delinquent Sears
credit card was paid several years ago. She did not present any documentation to
support her claim, but this debt does not appear on the most recent credit reports
available. (Answer; Gx. 5; Ax. D; Tr. 69)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 7
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 8
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 9
 Directive, 6.3.10
  “(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,11
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
4
The $170 debt at SOR 1.j arose when Applicant let a friend use her social
security number to qualify for a new cell phone account. Applicant’s friend then failed to
pay the bill as required. Applicant acknowledged that this is her responsibility to pay.
(Answer; Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 70)
Applicant is a Type 1 diabetic. In the past two years, she has incurred numerous
debts for the costs of related treatments and surgeries that are not covered by her
insurance. She submitted information about her current financial standing.  A personal
financial statement she submitted with her Answer shows that she has little left over
each month after meeting her current expenses and recurring medical costs, which
Applicant covers using her income. Applicant’s husband pays for their groceries,
utilities, and other household expenses. Together, they live in a house owned by her
parents for little or no rent. As of the hearing, Applicant was a month past due on her
monthly car payment. Applicant has consulted with two financial counseling and debt
management companies, but she did not use their services because she could not
afford the repayment plans they proposed. (Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 35 - 36, 38, 41, 76
- 78)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In7
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also8
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.9
Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense determination based
on examination of all available relevant and material information,  and consideration of10
the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions
must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-
person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(a).  The presence or absence of a11
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against
5
them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility for a
position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect sensitive information as his or her
own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access should be
resolved in favor of the Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information was sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations, except
for SOR 1.f, 1.s, and 1.t. The facts established by the remaining allegations reasonably
raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG ¶ 18,
as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
 The other mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 are not pertinent to these facts and circumstances.12
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;   
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.12
Applicant’s information was only sufficient to establish AG ¶ 20(e), but only as to
the duplicate debts and her ex-husband’s car loan debt alleged at SOR 1.f. Her other
claims that some of the debts might not be valid were not supported by any reliable
information.
None of the other mitigating conditions under this guideline apply based on the
information presented. Applicant continues to accrue unpaid medical debts, but she is
not in contact with her creditors. The past-due debts alleged in the SOR remain largely
unaddressed, despite her receipt of sufficient funds from her 2012 settlement and an
income tax refund in early 2015 to pay most of the debts alleged. At a minimum, she
could have addressed the ten alleged debts of less than $200 each. It is true that
Applicant’s financial problems have been caused or exacerbated by events beyond her
control. But her failure to act responsibly when she had sufficient resources with which
to resolve her debts reflects poorly on her judgment and reliability. She did not follow
through in her consultations with credit counseling resources, and her current finances
are not sound. Finally, one of her debts arose when she let a friend use her personal
information to obtain a cell phone account. Such conduct runs contrary to the most
fundamental expectations of one in whom sensitive personal information of others might
be entrusted. On balance, Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns
about her failure to meet her financial obligations.
 
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has a good reputation in the
workplace for trustworthiness and reliability. However, that positive information is not
sufficient, given the absence of other information showing financial responsibility and
good-faith efforts to resolve her debts, to overcome the doubts raised by the
Government’s information. Because protection of the interests of national security is the
principal purpose of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved
against the Applicant.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.s, 1.t: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 1.g - 1.r: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP
eligibility is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
