 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04568 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In a response to the SOR, dated January 20, 2015, Applicant admitted all 10 
allegations. He also requested a determination based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. On June 25, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
that contained four attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond within the 30 days 
provided. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. Based on my review of 
the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 65-year-old painter who worked for the same defense contractor 
from 1990 until November 2014, when he left work under the Family Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA) to care for his ailing wife. He has three children. Applicant served honorably in 
the United States Air Force from 1969 through 1988. He has maintained a security 
clearance without incident since 1969. At issue are 10 allegations (1.a-1.j), each 
representing a delinquent debt. Those debts range from $378 to $23,300, and amount 
to approximately $52,500. Applicant admits he owes all of the debts at issue.  
 
In 2005, Applicant’s wife was the victim of a “botched” surgery which required 
follow up procedures to address her condition. She began suffering from dementia, was 
placed in a nursing facility, and passed away in January 2015. In the interim, his 
financial situation worsened in the 2008-2009 timeframe when the economy dipped and 
Applicant’s credit cards saw drastic interest rate increases. As a result, he acquired 
delinquent debt. When he completed his 2014 security clearance application (SCA), 
however, he noted no adverse financial issues under Section 26 (Financial Record). 
 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence showing that he has made any 
attempt to work with any of his creditors, dispute any of the accounts at issue, or make 
any progress toward addressing either his finances or related security concerns. The 
record upon which he requested an administrative determination be made is very lean. 
It consists of the Government’s brief, the SOR, Applicant’s response to the SOR, notes 
from a subject interview, and a 2014 credit report.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
 
 
3 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts amounting to over $52,500. This is sufficient to invoke two of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
With regard to the debts at issue and their present status, the debts are multiple 
in number and remain unaddressed. There is no documentary evidence Applicant has 
received financial counseling. No evidence was introduced indicating Applicant’s current 
financial situation. Applicant admitted all of the debts at issue, and did not indicate he 
disputes any of those debts. Overall, there is no evidence of progress on these account 
balances noted in the SOR.   
 
With regard to the origin of the delinquent debts, Applicant asserts that his leave 
from work, his wife’s medical issues, and a downturn in the economy contributed to his 
financial distress. This assertion is both logical and credible. Clearly, his finances were 
adversely impacted by circumstances beyond his control, potentially raising AG ¶ 20(b). 
That mitigating condition, however, also requires a showing that the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. The scant information provided sheds little light 
on what, if any, efforts Applicant exerted at the time to work with his creditors, address 
the debts at issue, or dispute their accuracy. Lacking evidence of such responsible 
behavior, AG ¶ 20(b) cannot apply. In light of the above, none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
 
 
 
 
5 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant joined the United States Air Force shortly after high school. There, he 
received a security clearance he would maintain without adverse incident until the 
present. He remained in the military until he retired in 1988, after nearly two decades of 
honorable service. He started working for his present employer, a defense contractor, in 
1990. In 2005, his wife received inappropriate medical care. This caused her health to 
slowly deteriorate, requiring ever-increasing degrees of medical care and attention, 
including personal care provided by Applicant while on FMLA from work. In the interim, 
the economy suffered and Applicant’s credit cards notably increased their interest rates. 
Applicant’s wife recently passed away. Little is known of Applicant or his finances since 
that time. He does, however, attribute the 10 delinquent debts at issue to these facts. 
Those 10 delinquent debts amount to about $52,500.   
 
The scant facts of record are compelling and sympathetic. Applicant has 
responsibly maintained a security clearance both in and out of uniform for over three-
and-a-half decades. Applicant did his best to assist with his wife’s health care. The 
security concerns raised by the creation of his delinquent debts potentially could be 
mitigated. He failed, however, to offer any documentary evidence showing any efforts to 
work with his creditors at any point in the past decade. He also failed to provide any 
indication as to his present financial situation or plans for addressing this debt. With no 
documentary evidence tending to mitigate the security concerns raised, and no 
indication as to how he plans to address his debt, those concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
