1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06567
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant started incurring more than $11,000 in delinquent debts in late 2008,
and made no effort to resolve them until recently filing for bankruptcy. He also filed for
bankruptcy in 2004 to discharge over $37,000 in debts that he owed when he last
sought a clearance. The evidence is insufficient to mitigate resulting security concerns.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on May 22, 2014.
On February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on February 25, 2015, and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on June 29, 2015. The case was assigned to me on July 19, 2015. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21,
2015, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on August 11, 2015. The Government
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf and offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted
without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until August 25,
2015, for submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on August 17, 2015. Applicant did not submit any additional evidence
during the time allotted, nor did he request additional time to do so, and the record
closed as scheduled. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old marine electrician who has worked for a defense
contractor since July 2008. Immediately preceding that employment he was
unemployed for four months, after having being terminated for improper watch-standing
procedures by another defense contractor that had employed him as a security guard
since 2003. He is married, with two children ages 17 and 13. He is a high school
graduate, and was on active duty in the Navy from 1988 to 1993. He was honorably
discharged at paygrade E-4, then served in the Navy Reserve until March 1996. He
held a security clearance throughout most of his military service and subsequent
employment by defense contractors. (GE 1; Tr. 6-8, 38-39.) 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations concerning
his financial history. (AR.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the following
findings.
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in August 2004, after being
questioned by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in May
2004 about his financial delinquencies in connection with his previous application for a
security clearance. On November 19, 2004, the Bankruptcy Court discharged $37,768
of his unsecured debts owed to about 50 creditors and collection agencies. He told the
OPM investigator that his financial problems stemmed from being young and not very
smart with his finances and spending more than he had. He said that after his
bankruptcy he would be able to afford to keep any future debt he might incur paid in a
timely manner. (AR, GE 6; GE 7; Tr. 51-52.)
In 2006 Applicant and his wife borrowed money from her father to buy land and
build their house on it at the cost of about $172,000. In December 2007, after the house
was built, Applicant took out a $220,0000 first mortgage loan on the property and used
those proceeds to repay his father-in-law. He was not clear in describing what he did
with the remaining $48,000, other than to say that some went to his father-in-law for
other help with building the home. (GE 3; Tr. 52-54.)
3
In March 2008 Applicant was terminated from his previous job for improper
watch-standing procedures, and was unemployed until obtaining his current position in
July 2008. During that time he received unemployment compensation and his wife was
employed. From that point on, they started falling behind on mortgage payments and
other bills. They prioritized keeping their house, and in 2011 or 2012 they were able to
renegotiate the terms of their mortgage loan, which has been timely paid since then.
(AR; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 23-24, 39-41, 46-47, 54-56.)
The three SOR-listed credit card debts, totaling $10,612 (¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d),
first became delinquent in late 2008. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $1,054 medical debt that has
been delinquent since 2009. Applicant made no payments to any of these creditors
despite being employed in his present position throughout that time. He testified that he
earns $25 per hour, which would be about $54,000 per year, plus varying amounts of
overtime. His wife earns $21 per hour, or about $43,700 annually. (AR; GE 2; Tr. 39.)  
Applicant received his SOR on February 11, 2015, and promptly began the
process of filing another bankruptcy. On February 18, 2015, he completed the
mandatory credit counseling by an approved agency via the internet, but no debt
repayment plan was prepared. His Chapter 13 petition was filed on February 27, 2015,
and he documented eleven payments to a trustee between March 30, and August 3,
2015, totaling $6,264.75. Applicant did not supply evidence of his plan’s confirmation, or
the schedules showing what debts are included in it. He testified that the plan is to
continue for five years. He could not explain why the court set payments that will result
in almost $74,000 being paid into the plan over that period, when the only debt he could
identify, in addition to the $11,666 in debts on the SOR, was a loan of about $20,000 for
his wife’s new car that they purchased in November 2014.(SOR Receipt; AR; AE A; AE
B; Tr. 42-48, 66-67.)
Despite being invited and given extra time after his hearing to do so, Applicant
did not provide a copy of his family budget. He said they have a monthly surplus, but
very little in savings and things are tight with his new bankruptcy payments being taken
out of his paychecks. He also submitted no character references or other evidence
concerning the nature or quality of his job performance. (Tr. 47-51, 57-70.)  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
4
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The record evidence potentially raises security concerns under two Guideline F
DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant discharged more than $37,700 in formerly delinquent debt in November
2004 via a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He started falling behind on consumer and medical
debt again in 2008, and continues to owe more than $11,600 in delinquent debt that he
could not, or chose not to, repay. These debts and his history of financial irresponsibility
raise security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s SOR-listed delinquent debts are significant and ongoing, without
indication that the circumstances under which they arose have changed. His history of
financial irresponsibility goes back more than 12 years, despite regular employment in
positions of his choosing during all but four months when he collected unemployment
while between jobs. He therefore failed to establish substantial mitigation under MC
20(a). 
6
Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under
MC 20(b). He voluntarily incurred all of the debt in question, and has been fully
employed since the period the payments first became delinquent in late 2008. He
incurred an additional $20,000 in debt to buy a new car in November 2014, rather than
resolve his longstanding delinquencies. He did not demonstrate responsible action
under the circumstances.
Applicant provided evidence of recent bankruptcy credit counseling, but has not
yet shown substantial progress toward debt resolution or changes to bring his financial
situation under control. Bankruptcy is a lawful means of debt resolution, but is neither
intended, nor serves, to demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve past-due debts when
employed each time financial security concerns arise when applying for a clearance.
Applicant’s Chapter 13 plan may provide the discipline he needs to resolve his debts if
he balances future spending with income, but it does not yet establish mitigation of his
delinquent debts under MC 20(c) or (d). MC 20(e) is not implicated since Applicant
admitted all allegations in the SOR.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has incurred
substantial delinquent indebtedness that he made little effort to repay. These debts
remain outstanding, creating the ongoing potential for pressure and duress. He
presented insufficient evidence to show that his financial situation will not continue to
deteriorate, to support a finding that continuation or recurrence are unlikely, or that
behavioral changes demonstrate rehabilitation. He is a mature and experienced
individual who is accountable for his choices and financial irresponsibility. Overall, the
7
record evidence creates ongoing doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability
for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
