 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-05795 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On April 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In a response to the SOR, dated July 2, 2015, Applicant admitted the three 
allegations raised. He also requested a determination based on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing. On August 28, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) that contained five attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond within the 
30 days provided. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. Based on my 
review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old software developer who has attended approximately 
five years of college. He held multiple internships during those years. His undergraduate 
education ended in mid-2013. He has no military experience. Applicant is single and 
has no children.  
 
At issue in the SOR are three allegations:  
 
1) Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013; 
2) Applicant failed to file State income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013; 
and  
3) Applicant owes $88 on a local collection account with a date of last activity in 
early 2013.  
 
Applicant appears to admit all three allegations. He explained that he forgot to file 
the tax returns at issue after a relative who previously filed on his behalf retired. He 
asserts, however, that he filed the neglected 2012 and 2013 tax year tax returns 
through a representative in May 2015, after receiving the SOR. No documentary 
evidence of such filings, however, was offered to substantiate this assertion.  
 
As for the collection account balance at issue, Applicant notes only that he has 
not been able to reach the collection entity regarding the $88 balance during its regular 
business hours. No documentary evidence was presented indicating any alternative 
methods attempted by Applicant to contact the collection entity or otherwise either 
address or dispute this debt.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
 
 
 
3 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant failed to 
timely file Federal and State tax forms for tax years 2012 and 2013. It also showed he 
has neglected an $88 collection balance from 2013. This is sufficient to invoke two of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant attributed his failure to timely file his tax returns to his having forgotten 
to do so after his usual tax representative retired. He offers no explanation with regard 
to the 2013 collection account balance except that he has not, for some unspecified 
reason, been able to contact the entity during normal working hours. No evidence was 
introduced to show that either his debt or his failure to timely file tax returns was caused 
by circumstances beyond his control. There is no evidence he has received financial 
counseling. Applicant provided no documentary evidence showing that his tax filings 
were actually completed. Moreover, there is no documentary evidence showing he has 
made any efforts to validate, dispute, honor, or take any action on his delinquent $88 
debt. While there is no reason to suggest Applicant’s statements regarding these 
allegations are untrue, documentary evidence is necessary to substantiate his 
assertions. Lacking such proof, financial considerations security concerns are 
sustained. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
5 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old software developer who has attended college and held 
multiple academic internships. His undergraduate education ended in 2013. He is single 
and has no children. He forgot to file his Federal and State tax returns for tax years 
2012 and 2013 after a relative, who had previously prepared his taxes, retired. Applicant 
stated that those forms have since been filed, but provided no documentary evidence to 
that effect. Moreover, he has neither investigated nor addressed a 2013 collection 
account balance for $88 in his name.  
 
The burden in these proceedings is on the applicant to provide documented 
evidence rebutting, refuting, or otherwise challenging evidence of delinquent debt or 
suggestions of failing to timely comply with tax burdens. Applicant’s explanations and 
commentary do little to establish progress on the allegations raised. With no 
documentary evidence tending to mitigate the security concerns raised, those concerns 
remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
