                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04692
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 25, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) May 8, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  On January 8, 2015, the Department of
Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the (DoD) could not
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on January 22, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
September 11, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on September 18, 2015.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant submitted a reply to the FORM, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits
A through C.  This case was assigned to the undersigned on November 10, 2015.
2
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.   
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 48 years old, and is married with one adult daughter.  He has an
Associates degree and is a Federal contractor working for a defense contractor as a
Computer Consultant. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with
this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are eight delinquent debts set forth in the SOR totaling approximately
$12,586.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations under this guideline.  Applicant’s
credit report dated May 22, 2014, which includes information from all three credit
reporting agencies, indicates that Applicant was at one time indebted to each of the
creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibit 7.)       
     
Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to a downturn in the economy.  From
2006 to the present, Applicant has been self-employed as a Computer Consultant.
From January 2014 to March 2014, Applicant was unemployed and was supported by
his savings and spouse’s income.  He states that he was receiving unemployment
benefits for a while.  His e-QIP lists no period of unemployment.  Applicant apparently
took unemployment benefits because his income was insufficient to live on.  The
following debts became delinquent and owing.  
1.a., Applicant became indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical account in
the amount of $601.  Applicant initially claimed that the debt is still under review by the
insurance company.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates that he has recently
set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  He submitted a copy of his credit union
statement showing that he started making payments in October 2015.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B.)   
1.b., Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical account placed
into collection in the amount of $1,224.  Applicant initially claimed that the debt is still
under review by the insurance company.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates
that he has recently set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  He submitted a copy of
his credit union statement showing that he started making payments in October 2015.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
3
 1.c., Applicant is indebted for a judgment filed against him in June 2013 in the
amount of $4,723.  This debt involved a delinquent credit card.  Applicant contends that
the debts listed in 1.c and 1.h are the same debt.  Applicant submitted copies of money
orders made out to FIA card services showing that he began making payments to the
creditor in May 2014.  (See allegation 1.h).      
1.d., Applicant is indebted for a medical account placed for collection in the
amount of $200.  Applicant initially claimed that the debt is still under review by the
insurance company.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates that he has recently
set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  He submitted a copy of his credit union
statement showing that he started making payments in October 2015.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B.)   
     
1.e., Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical account in the
amount of $895.  Applicant initially claimed that the debt is still under review by the
insurance company.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates that he has recently
set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  He submitted a copy of his credit union
statement showing that he started making payments in October 2015.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B.)   
    
1.f., Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical account in the
amount of $174.  Applicant initially claimed that the debt is still under review by the
insurance company.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates that he has recently
set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  He submitted a copy of his credit union
statement showing that he started making payments in October 2015.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B.)   
1.g., Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for
collection in the amount of $581.  Applicant claims that this was an oversight and he
plans to aggressively pay it off.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM indicates that he
paid $232.33 on April 4, 2015, to settle the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)   
1.h., Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $4,188. This debt
concerns a delinquent credit card.  Initially, there was no evidence in the record to show
how much, if anything, has been paid toward the debt.  Applicant’s response to the
FORM indicates that he is making payments of $125 monthly toward the debt that
started at $5,395 and has been reduced down to $2,521.72.  He plans to continue with
his payment plan until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)   
4
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; 
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and /or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
     b.  the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
5
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicantshall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
6
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
The evidence presented shows that Applicant has been working to resolve his
debts.  It appears that for a time he was employed, but not earning enough to pay his
bills. He was then unemployed for a short time and fell behind on some bills.  He has
recently started a new job, and now believes he has sufficient income to pay off his
delinquent debts.  His documentary evidence shows that he is working diligently to pay
off his delinquent debts.       
      
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has met his burden of
proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He has a concrete understanding of
his financial responsibilities and has sufficiently addressed his delinquent debts in the
SOR.  Thus, it can be said that he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his past-due
indebtedness.  He has shown that he is or has been reasonably, responsibly, or
prudently addressing his financial situation.  Thus, Applicant has demonstrated that he
can properly handle his financial affairs.  He must continue to completely resolve his
delinquent indebtedness by following his payment plans.  He must demonstrate a
history and pattern of financial responsibility, including the fact he has not acquired any
new debt that he is unable to pay.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, in this case, Mitigation Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debt
are also applicable.  For a time, Applicant was not earning enough money to live on and
was collecting unemployment benefits.  He now has a new job and is paying off his
delinquent debts.  It can be said that he has made a good-faith effort to satisfy his
delinquent debts.  In fact, he has shown that he is financially responsible.  Accordingly, I
find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
7
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  For Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.d. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.e. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.f. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.g. For Applicant.
Subpara.    1.h. For Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
