 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06920  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts owed to a creditor for four student loans, totaling 
$27,000, and to two other creditors. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 11, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On April 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2015 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) On August 20, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on August 25, 2015, and received by him on September 24, 
2015. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM. He timely submitted an exhibit that I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and 
admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. Applicant did not 
submit any objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 7 are 
admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on November 17, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all six of the allegations contained in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married. He and his wife have three young children. 
In 2004 he earned an associate’s degree. He subsequently attended college for two 
years, but did not complete a degree. In July 2007 he began working for his current 
employer, a federal contractor. (Item 4.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from March 2013 and October 2014, the 
SOR alleged six delinquent debts. Four of those debts are delinquent student loans, 
which total $27,898. The SOR also alleged a delinquent credit card ($2,586) and 
medical bill ($227). The debts became delinquent between 2013 and 2014. (Items 5, 7.) 
In his Answer, Applicant stated that he was unable to pay the debts because his family 
lives on his salary, as his wife stays home with their three young children who are not 
school age. (Item 3.)  
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted information that he transferred the 
four student loans to a new creditor, not listed on the CBRs. Two of the loans were 
dispersed in 2006 and two in 2007. According to Applicant’s calculation, the outstanding 
balance of the four loans is $20,088. On September 27, 2015, Applicant entered into a 
loan rehabilitation agreement with his new creditor. The agreement requires him to pay 
$5 per month, beginning that month, and continuing for nine consecutive months. 
Thereafter, the loans become eligible to be purchased by a lending institution, and the 
monthly payment will increase. (AE A.) No other evidence was provided regarding the 
remaining delinquent debts.  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
 
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s student loans became delinquent in 2013 and continued to be 
delinquent until September 2015 when he entered into a loan rehabilitation agreement. 
The credit card and medical debts became delinquent between 2013 and 2014. 
Applicant’s history of inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and  cast doubt on his reliability. He 
provided some evidence that the delinquencies were caused by his wife’s decision to 
not work outside the home because she is caring for their small children. That situation 
may be a condition beyond his control; but he failed to submit documentation indicating 
that prior to September 27, 2015, he attempted to contact creditors or act responsibly 
under these circumstances. He presented no evidence of financial counseling. He 
presented no evidence about his non-student loan debts. There are not clear indications 
that the financial problems are under control. Applicant produced evidence that two 
days after receiving the FORM, he entered into a loan rehabilitation agreement and 
consolidated his student loans. His actions in this instance are not construed to be a 
good-faith effort to resolve his debts, as contemplated under the above mitigating 
conditions. He did not formally dispute any of the SOR-listed debts. Accordingly, the 
record is insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the foregoing provisions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
 
 
6 
 
 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
alleged in the SOR. He waited until receiving the FORM to address his delinquent 
student loans, and has not taken action on two other delinquent debts. He has not 
completed the student loan rehabilitation program and established a realistic payment 
plan toward resolution of these debts. He provided no evidence of financial counseling 
or a budget. At this time he has not established a track record of debt resolution or 
financial responsibility. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his 
financial situation remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from the financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
