 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-06625 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 8, 2011, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On February 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or continued.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On March 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 10, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 1, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 8, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 7, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through AE M, which were received into evidence without objection. I 
held the record open until July 24, 2015, to afford the Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE N through AE R, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On July 16, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted in part and denied in part SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, with 
explanations, and admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e, with explanations. Applicant’s 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2009. He seeks to retain his top secret security clearance as a requirement 
of his continued employment. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2006. (GE 
1; Tr. 17-18, 47-55)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2000. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in information systems in May 2009. (GE 1; Tr. 18-20, 51) Applicant 
married in July 2008, and has three children – a six-year-old daughter, a three-year-
old daughter, and a one-year-old son. His wife is not employed outside of the home.  
Applicant served in the Army National Guard from August 2002 to August 2010, and 
was honorably discharged as a private first class (pay grade E-3). (GE 1; AE R; Tr. 
20-23, 51) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The misconduct1 under this concern came to the Government’s attention after 
Applicant self-reported it during or after a 2012 polygraph examination. (GE 5 – GE 7; 
Tr. 47-48, 67-71) The following events span a 13-year period beginning when 
Applicant was 12 years old and ending when he 26 years old. Summarized, the 
misconduct is as follows: (1) in approximately 1996, at age “12 or 13,” Applicant stole 
“roughly five action figures” valued at $10 to $15 “once or twice” from a hobby store in 
approximately 1996; (2) in approximately 1996 or 1997, at age “ roughly 12 or 13,” 
                                                          
1
 The misconduct findings consist of a compilation derived from the SOR allegations, 
Applicant’s SOR answer, hearing exhibits, and the hearing transcript.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant lied to a delivery service claiming that he did not receive paintball equipment 
that he had in fact received resulting in the delivery service refunding him 
approximately $50 to 150; (3) between approximately 1998 and 1999, at “roughly age 
15,” Applicant used a credit card – that his older brother had stolen -- on at least one 
occasion to withdraw money from an ATM and to purchase approximately $300 to 
$400 worth of merchandise; (4) between approximately 2000 and 2001, at age “16 or 
17,” Applicant used an ATM card that someone accidently left to withdraw the 
maximum amount of cash allowed, “either $300 to $400, from that individual’s 
account;” (5)  in 2006, at age 22, Applicant made five or six on-line sports bets 
between $25 and $200 and when he lost one bet, he called the credit card company to 
dispute the charge at his brother’s urging; and (6) while shopping in 2009, at age 26, 
on one occasion while leaving a department store, Applicant placed items on the 
bottom of his shopping cart and realized the clerk had not charged him for the items 
after he left the store. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f; SOR answer; GE 7; Tr. 28-34, 36-47, 59-67, 
76-79)   
 
 Applicant is the youngest of three children of immigrant parents. He has an 
older brother and a sister. He described his parents as hard working, who were often 
times absent, leaving Applicant at home with his older siblings and grandparents. 
Applicant described himself as a “shy kid” and “liked hanging around with my brother 
and sister when they would let me.”  However, when his brother and sister were in 
high school, they “would start to act out and do some bad things” and Applicant 
“became the tattle tale and [would] always tell on them.” From that point on, his older 
siblings did not want to “hang out” with him. The bad things included stealing their 
parents’ car, sneaking out, stealing, and drug use.  (Tr. 23-26)  
 
 Applicant stated he has changed significantly from his middle school and high 
school years to the person he is today. He described himself as unpopular in school, 
immature, and having no responsibility. Applicant described his misconduct as 
“[f]oolish, irresponsible and just overall lack of judgment.” He also came under the 
negative influence of his older brother “[b]ecause that was the only way I could get to 
spend time with him.” When Applicant engaged in misconduct with his older brother, 
“[his older brother] was willing to hang out with me and he would include me in the 
activities that he was doing.” (Tr. 27-34, 55, 67, 70-71)  
 
Applicant sees his older brother about one or two times a year during family 
visits and primarily communicates with him by e-mail.  His older brother has no 
influence on his decision making or behavior. Applicant’s focus is on taking care of his 
family. (Tr. 36-43, 41-42) Applicant’s older brother is employed full-time in the 
information technology field, is married, and has his own family. (Tr. 72-76) 
 
 Applicant is ashamed about what he has done in the past. He stated that he is 
not the same person who exercised a lack of judgment and who engaged in 
irresponsible and immature behavior. He is married, has three children, and no longer 
needs to seek the approval of his older brother. He knows the difference between right 
and wrong. It is very important for Applicant to serve as a role model for his children. It 
 
4 
 
 
was very difficult for Applicant to explain to his six-year-old daughter why he was 
going to a security clearance hearing. In short, he wants his children to look up to him. 
(Tr. 34-36, 55-57, 67)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 In addition to testifying on his own behalf, Applicant called three witnesses: (1) 
a life-long friend, who has known Applicant for 27 years (LLF); (2) Applicant’s wife of 
seven years (W); and (3) a co-worker (CW) of three years.   
 
 LLF is a Government contractor, has deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan to 
provide logistics support for the troops, holds a high-level security clearance, and is 
familiar with security clearance requirements.  LLF is very familiar with Applicant’s 
character and dedication to his family. LLF is aware of the allegations against 
Applicant and continues to support Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 81-87) 
 
 W has known Applicant for 15 years and has been married to him for seven 
years. The three most important qualities she seeks in her husband are honesty, 
respect, and loyalty. Applicant is a “great father… cares for his kids… teaches his kids 
… supports them really well … (and) is there for them.”  The SOR allegations do not 
reflect the kind of person that Applicant is today. Applicant does not associate with his 
older brother, he has matured, and he has embraced the responsibilities of being a 
good husband and father. Otherwise, W would not be with him. (Tr. 88-93) 
 
 CW is a systems engineer employed by the same company as Applicant since 
April 2011, and has known him since early 2014. CW holds a security clearance and is 
familiar with security clearance requirements. CW considers Applicant to be one of his 
“good friends” and knows him not only in the workplace, but also off-duty. CW 
considers Applicant to be a good employee, a good co-worker, and a good family 
man. CW is familiar with the SOR allegations against him, and they do not represent 
the person Applicant is today. CW recommends Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 
94-99) 
 
 Applicant submitted 12 reference letters from a range of individuals to include 
senior company managers, co-workers, family members, and long-time friends. The 
collective sense of these letters conveys that Applicant is an individual who has 
significantly matured and who is reliable, trustworthy, a family man, an excellent 
worker, making a substantial contribution to the national defense, and is an overall 
“standup guy.” All reference letters strongly endorse continuation of Applicant’s 
security clearance. (AE A – AE H, AE N – AE Q) He also submitted 15 awards and 
commendation certificates acknowledging his work performance and contribution to 
the national defense. (AE I(1) – AE I(7), AE J(1) – AE J(6), AE L – AE M)  
 
 Lastly, Applicant submitted a psychological evaluation report dated April 17, 
2015. The evaluation was thorough and detailed and co-signed by two licensed 
psychologists. The report stated that Applicant has expressed appropriate remorse 
 
5 
 
 
and guilt for his past actions. Applicant has taken full responsibility for his actions and 
clearly modified his behavior and thinking. Test results do not indicate that poor 
judgment and past adolescent thought patterns would impact his current level of 
functioning. The psychologists recommended that Applicant be granted his security 
clearance. (AE K) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
  
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 articulate the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which when combined with all available information 
 
7 
 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
The evidence supports application of AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) as a result of 
Applicant’s 13-years of periodic misconduct. Details in the findings section such as 
dates and frequency of offenses vary somewhat from those alleged in the SOR.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists seven mitigating conditions under this security concern: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
8 
 
 
It was particularly helpful to hear Applicant’s testimony and observe him. This 
case came about as a result of Applicant’s self-reporting his past misconduct following 
a 2012 polygraph examination. Throughout the process, Applicant accepted 
responsibility for his actions, showed considerable maturity, and expressed sincere 
remorse. He submitted a thorough and favorable psychological examination. 
Applicant’s witnesses and reference letters provided compelling evidence that he has 
embraced the role of parent, husband, law-abiding citizen, and conscientious 
employee. 
 
Applicant is no longer under the influence of his older brother nor does he seek 
his approval. At least six years has elapsed since the last misconduct and the majority 
of misconduct occurred when Applicant was a juvenile. That is not to say that 
Applicant’s past conduct is not serious. Perhaps most compelling is that Applicant 
does not want to be known as a thief to his children. This, as well as the positive 
changes that Applicant has made and time elapsed warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 
17(c), 17(d), and 17(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain the conduct expected of one 
entrusted with a security clearance. His employment history is indicative of stability 
and a strong work ethic. Applicant is making a positive contribution to the national 
defense. His 15 witnesses and character references provided compelling evidence of 
an individual who has turned his life around. This support and self-introspection should 
ensure his continued success. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and 
 
9 
 
 
commitment to avoiding further misconduct. Considering his demeanor, testimony, 
and evidence presented, I believe Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and his 
misconduct and poor judgment are unlikely to recur. I find Applicant has presented 
sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
In sum, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”2 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
