 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06949  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided proof that he timely filed his 2013 Federal and state income 
tax returns and paid all taxes for that year. He did not provide sufficient proof that he 
resolved an $86,000 home equity loan which became delinquent in 2011. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On May 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2015 (Answer), and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On September 28, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 29, 2015, and received by him on October 
10, 2015. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM. He did not submit any additional information or file objections to the 
Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on December 18, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.d, and admitted the allegation in ¶ 1.e. (Item 1.)  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and separated from his third wife. He has two children 
ages 17 and 14. He has worked for his current employer since 1997 and held a security 
clearance for most of that time. He is a quality engineer. (Item 2.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his 2013 Federal and state income 
tax returns; and that he was indebted $2,000 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and 
owed $10,000 to a state government for that year. Applicant submitted a document 
confirming that he received a filing extension to October 15, 2014, for 2013. He filed his 
Federal and state returns on October 15, 2014, electronically. At that time he paid 
$2,030 to the IRS and received a tax refund of $485 from the state. After submitting the 
Federal return the IRS notified him that he owed an additional $30.84, which he paid in 
early November 2014. (Item 1: Answer.) All matters related to the filing of his 2013 
income taxes were resolved prior to the issuance of the SOR in May 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1. b, 1.c, and 1.d.).  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from June 2014 and September 2015, 
the SOR alleged that Applicant also has a delinquent debt for $86,599 owed to a bank 
for a home equity loan on real estate that went into foreclosure in July 2011. (Items 4, 
5.) Applicant stated that the bank reneged on the agreement he had negotiated shortly 
after he agreed to it in 2011. In March 2012 he faxed an inquiry to the bank for certain 
information. In May 2012 the bank notified him that the bank was reviewing the matter. 
In April 2015 the bank notified Applicant that it would agree to settle the debt for 
$13,356 and requested that he notify the bank within 15 days of his decision. In his 
August 2015 Answer, Applicant noted that he was continuing to negotiate with the bank. 
(Item 1: Answer.) The case file does not contain any information as to whether Applicant 
resolved the debt. This debt is unresolved (SOR ¶ 1. e).  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ ¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The evidence regarding Applicant’s 2013 Federal and State income tax returns 
and taxes owed, does not support a disqualifying condition under this guideline. 
Applicant received a filing extension for the year 2013. He complied with that deadline 
and paid the required taxes to the IRS, but for $30, and received a refund from his state. 
However, Applicant has an $86,599 delinquent home equity loan from 2011, which he 
has been unwilling or unable to resolve. This raises a security concern under the above 
disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debt for $86,599 has been ongoing since 2011 and raises 
questions about his judgment and reliability. The evidence does not establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(a). He provided some evidence that the debt may have been caused by 
a circumstance beyond his control, but he did not elaborate. He provided limited 
documentation indicating that he attempted to act responsibly after learning of the 
foreclosure in July 2011, but he did not document any further actions after receiving the 
bank’s May 2012 correspondence or the bank’s offer in April 2015. AG ¶ 20(b) provides 
limited mitigation. He presented no evidence of financial counseling or documentation 
that there are clear indications that his financial problem is under control or being 
resolved in good faith. He did not provide evidence that he disputed the legitimacy of 
the delinquent debt. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d) or (e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his financial obligations. In July 2011 the bank determined that he 
was in default of a home equity loan. After requesting information from the bank 
regarding its adverse decision, the bank informed him in May 2012 that it was reviewing 
the matter. There is no evidence of any activity on this debt from May 2012 to April 
2015, at which time the bank offered to settle the debt for about $13,000 and requested 
a prompt response from Applicant. In his August 2015 Answer, Applicant stated that he 
continued to negotiate with the bank about its settlement offer. This debt has been 
delinquent for almost four years and there is no evidence that Applicant is closer to a 
resolution of his financial obligation or why he did not accept the previous offer. He 
provided no evidence of financial or budget counseling, or that he is currently managing 
his other finances in a responsible manner. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
