 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06034 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeffrey L. Rhodes, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency between 1995 and 
2010, and tested positive for marijuana use in 1998. He used marijuana six times after 
he was granted a security clearance in 2005. He disclosed his marijuana use in his 
2004 and 2014 security clearance applications (SCA). There is no evidence of any 
further illegal drug use after 2010. Under the circumstances of this case, Applicant’s use 
of marijuana does not raise questions about his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, ability to comply with the law, and to protect classified information. He 
mitigated the Guidelines H and E security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA on January 8, 2014. After reviewing it, 
and the information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant or deny Applicant’s 
eligibility for a clearance. On January 23, 2015, DOD issued him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and 
 
2 
 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2015, 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated September 2, 
2015, was mailed to him on September 17, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 5, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to 
provide material in rebuttal, extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant failed to submit an 
answer within the period provided. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. 
On January 11, 2016, Applicant’s attorney filed a motion requesting leave to file a 
response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object, and I granted the motion. 
Applicant submitted his response to the FORM on January 29, 2016, which included 
Applicant’s statement of intent to never use illegal drugs again, with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. Department Counsel did not object, and 
Applicant’s FORM response was admitted and included in the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, including the evidence attached to the FORM (Items 1 through 7) and 
his response to the FORM, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1993. He attended college from 1993 to 1999, and earned bachelor’s 
degrees in May 1998 and in May 1999. Applicant has never been married, and he has 
no children. He started working for federal contractors in 2004, and was hired by his 
current employer, a federal contractor, in January 2012. 
 
Applicant submitted his first security clearance application in June 2004. He 
disclosed in Section 27 (Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity – Illegal Use of 
Drugs) that he illegally used marijuana on about 50 occasions between 1995 and 2003. 
He later explained to a government investigator during his September 2004 interview 
that, as a junior in college (1993), he worked as a bartender and his coworkers 
introduced him to marijuana. After work they would get together to smoke marijuana. In 
1998, Applicant applied for a position in a computer manufacturing company. As part of 
the in processing, he was screened for drug use, which tested positive for marijuana 
and he was not hired for the position.  
 
Applicant further stated in his September 2004 interview that he decided that the 
continued use of marijuana was not worth the risks to his personal life and potential new 
                                            
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
jobs. He claimed that he had made the decision not to use marijuana in the future and 
that he had not done so since 2003. Following his interview, Applicant was granted a 
secret level clearance in April 2005.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2014. In his response to Section 23 
(Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), Applicant disclosed that he had illegally used 
marijuana, while possessing a security clearance, approximately six times between 
February 2008 and December 2010. He claimed that his use was concurrent with heavy 
alcohol use in social settings. Applicant further claimed that he had not use any illegal 
drugs since December 2010. 
 
During a subsequent government interview in 2014, Applicant disclosed the 
circumstances surrounding his last use of marijuana in 2010. He averred that he loves 
his job and realized it is not worth putting his job at risk by breaking the law. In his 
answer to the FORM, Applicant claimed that he has never been addicted to marijuana, 
and he used it occasionally when it was provided by others. Applicant averred that he 
no longer associates with his marijuana-using friends or frequents places where the 
illegal use of drugs is likely. To show his commitment to never use illegal drugs again, 
Applicant submitted a written statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that his illegal drug use demonstrated bad judgment; 
however, he noted that his admissions also demonstrate his honesty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
 
4 
 
 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency between 1995 and 
December 2010. He tested positive for marijuana use in 1998. Furthermore, he used 
marijuana at least six times between 1998 and 2010, after he was granted a secret level 
security clearance in 2005.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
5 
 
 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
Both Guideline H mitigating conditions are raised by the facts and circumstances 
in this case and mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Applicant disclosed 
his illegal use of marijuana in both his 2004 and 2014 SCAs. There is no evidence that 
the Government had any independent knowledge about his use of marijuana prior to his 
disclosures. The SOR allegations were based on his candid disclosures in both his 
2004 and 2014 SCAs. 
 
It has been over five years since Applicant’s most recent use of marijuana. There 
is no evidence of any further illegal drug abuse after December 2010. Applicant 
promised to never use any illegal drugs ever again. To reinforce his commitment, 
Applicant signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. I have given this statement less weight, and reviewed Applicant’s evidence 
cautiously, in light of his prior unkept promise not to use marijuana.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The Guideline E allegation cross-alleged the same facts and circumstances 
alleged under Guideline H, which are incorporated herein by reference. Applicant’s 
illegal drug use triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
6 
 
 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists five conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 Applicant disclosed his illegal use of marijuana in both his 2004 and 2014 SCAs. 
The Government had no independent knowledge of Applicant’s use of illegal drugs until 
his disclosures. Applicant’s disclosures demonstrate an acknowledgment of his 
mistakes. It also shows his intent to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. By 
disclosing the information, Applicant reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. Moreover, it shows Applicant’s current maturity, judgment, 
and his desire to be truthful, reliable, and honest.  
 
 For the above reasons, and those discussed under Guideline H, incorporated 
herein, I find that AG ¶ 17 ¶¶ (c), (d), and (e) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my 
 
7 
 
 
whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. His past illegal drug 
use is not recent. There is no evidence of any further marijuana use after 2010, or of 
any other illegal drug use. He has established a reasonable period of abstinence and a 
change of lifestyle. Applicant was honest and forthcoming in both his 2004 and 2014 
SCAs and disclosed his past illegal drug use. 
 
I carefully considered that Applicant promised in 2003-2004 to stop using illegal 
drugs and he failed to keep it. His illegal marijuana use after he was granted a security 
clearance in 2005 raises serious concerns. Applicant violated the trust placed on him by 
the Government. His criminal behavior underlines his possible inability or unwillingness 
to comply with the law, rules, and regulations.  
 
On balance, Applicant’s period of abstinence, his disclosures in both of his SCAs, 
and his statement of intent under penalty of clearance revocation for any violation, give 
substance to his promise to never use drugs again. He clearly understands the possible 
adverse consequences he will face if he is ever involved in the use of illegal drugs. He 
specifically understands that he could be fired from his job, and his eligibility for a 
security clearance may be revoked. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his mistakes and demonstrated his intent to comply with 
the law, rules, and regulations in the future. His disclosures show Applicant’s current 
maturity, judgment, and his desire to be truthful, reliable, and honest. After weighing all 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.      
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
