 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX    )  ADP Case No. 14-04683 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated trustworthiness concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Her eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 28, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions version of an application for a public trust position (SF-86). On January 8, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy 
a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. The DOD CAF 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On February 10, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 1, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On June 5, 2015, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 9, 
2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into evidence without objection. I held 
the record open until July 24, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to offer 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE F through P, which were received 
into evidence without objection. On July 17, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
 
           Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.k. Without objection from the 
Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 9-10) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f. and 1.k with explanations, and admitted the 
remaining SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old operations manager employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2013. She seeks a public trust position as a requirement of her continued 
employment. (GE 1; Tr. 15, 17-18)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1976. She took “some college 
courses but [she] didn’t complete college.” Applicant was married two times – from July 
1988 to August 2003 and from January 2004 to March 2009. Both marriages ended by 
divorce. She has two adult children, a son and a daughter. Applicant did not serve in the 
U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 15-16, 18-20, 23-24)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
With the withdrawal of SOR ¶ 1.k, ten allegations remained consisting of two tax-
related allegations and eight debts totaling $15,186. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.k) Applicant 
attributes her financial problems and failure to file her 2012 state and federal tax returns 
to events leading up to, during, and after her 2009 divorce, and a period of 
unemployment from June 2012 to July 2013. The cumulative effect of these events 
resulted in Applicant “having a meltdown and not being functional enough to be 
responsible.” Before Applicant married her second husband, she had good credit, 
owned a home, had built up her savings, and was on track to retire at 55. (GE 1; Tr. 20-
27)  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant approached the resolution of her debts in a systematic and measured 
way. She prioritized her debts starting first by filing her 2012 state and federal tax 
returns in 2014. Her cumulative state and federal tax liability was approximately $2,400. 
She set up a monthly payment plan of $200 to address her tax debt and paid off that 
cumulative debt shortly after her hearing. All of her past tax issues are resolved. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.e and 1.f; Tr. 28-35; AE E – AE I) 
 
Next, Applicant paid off two of her smaller debts, an $85 collection utility account 
and a $119 collection utility account. (SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.j; Tr. 35-37; AE M, AE N, AE O) 
She has attempted to pay a $64 collection medical account. However, after repeated 
attempts to locate the creditor Applicant stated, “no one can seem to find me or the bill 
in their system.” She will continue her efforts to locate creditor. (SOR ¶ 1.h; Tr. 35-37) 
She also will continue with her plan to repay her remaining five debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.d, 1.i; Tr. 35-37) When she was unable to pay her creditors, Applicant contacted all of 
them to inform them that she was unemployed and would contact them after she was 
employed to make payment arrangements. (Tr. 36-37)  
 
At the time of hearing, Applicant was paying $1,045 a month in rent plus utilities. 
In order to have more funds to pay down her debts, Applicant moved in with her adult 
daughter at the end of her lease in November 2015. Her daughter submitted a letter 
stating that Applicant “will live in my home as long as necessary, rent-free, so that she 
will be financially enabled to pay her debt.” Her daughter also stated that she would be 
providing her mother with financial assistance on an as-needed basis. (Tr. 38-41; AE C, 
AE E) Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $43,000. (Tr. 18) Her budget reflects 
that she leads a modest lifestyle and lives paycheck to paycheck. (AE E) Applicant is 
working with a financial counselor. (AE M) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 In addition to her daughter’s letter, Applicant submitted three work-related 
reference letters: (1) new business manager/operations manager; (2) compliance and 
security officer; and (3) referral management trainer. The collective sense of these 
documents describes Applicant as hard working, a team player, honest, and 
trustworthy. These individuals support Applicant for a public trust position. (AE A, AE B, 
AE D)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
   
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt 
is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
            Applicant’s conduct in resolving her debts warrants application of AG ¶ 20(b). The 
fallout from Applicant’s 2009 divorce and period of unemployment from June 2012 to 
July 2013 could not have been anticipated. Her financial problems were generated by 
circumstances beyond her control. Applicant acted responsibly by remaining in contact 
with her creditors; however, she did not have the money to pay them. When she did 
acquire the money, she began addressing her debts by prioritizing them beginning with 
filing and paying her state and federal income taxes.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. Applicant consulted with a credit counselor. Her plan to 
regain financial responsibility started by addressing her tax liability and proceeding from 
there. She paid off two of her smaller debts and has additional funds as a result of 
moving in with her daughter. She will apply those funds to larger debts. Her budget 
reflects she leads a modest lifestyle and does her best with the resources she has.  
 
Full mitigation is warranted under AG ¶ 20(d).1 There are clear indications that 
her financial problems are resolved or are being resolved. She is taking this process 
seriously and has demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay her creditors with the 
means available to her. She will continue to do so until she has regained financial 
responsibility. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant because she did not dispute her responsibility 
for any SOR debts. 
 
In sum, Applicant has taken reasonable actions to resolve her delinquent debts 
and regain her financial responsibility. Her efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns. Assuming, financial considerations concerns 
are not mitigated under AG ¶ 20, trustworthiness concerns are mitigated under the 
whole-person concept, infra. 
 
 
 
                                            
 
1
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Applicant had the misfortune of going through a divorce that financially and 
emotionally devastated her. Three years after her divorce she experienced a 13-month 
period of unemployment. Applicant’s efforts to regain financial responsibility are 
ongoing. She has made a significant lifestyle adjustment by moving in with her daughter 
to free up money to repay her creditors.   
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s circumstances that led 
to her financial difficulties, the steps she has taken to resolve her financial situation, her 
potential for future service as a defense contractor, her reference letters, and her 
testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and 
all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that [she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that [she] has . . . established a plan to resolve [her] financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and [her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the reduction of [her] outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. 
See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in 
reaching a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will resolve the remaining debts on 
his SOR and maintain her financial responsibility.2    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Withdrawn 
 
 
 
                                            
2
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a public trust position now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider 
the [trustworthiness] significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having 
negative [trustworthiness] significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation 
of a promise made in a trustworthiness context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns 
under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a public trust position. An administrative judge 
does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary [public trust position].” ISCR 
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 
28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no 
authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary [public trust position] to allow her the 
opportunity to have a [public trust position] while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote 
does not imply that this Applicant’s public trust position is conditional. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                  
