 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04730   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns related to her history of occasional and casual marijuana use between 2002 
and 2012. She has observed a two-year period of abstinence and has demonstrated 
intent to abstain from use of illegal drugs in the future. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on July 15, 2015. Applicant received a complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant 
on July 31, 2015. She did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 8, 2015.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that “[Applicant] expressed an intent [sic] to use marijuana in 
the future if the drug is ruled constitutionally and federally legal.” Not only does the 
allegation mischaracterize Applicant’s statements on the issue of future intent, it does 
not allege disqualifying conduct. As a result, this allegation is resolved in Applicant’s 
favor.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, has worked for a federal contractor since January 2014. On her 
security clearance application, submitted in March 2015, Applicant disclosed eight uses 
of marijuana use between June 2002 and 2012. She has described her marijuana use 
as experimental. Some of her drug use occurred with her boyfriend who gave the drug 
to her. On the occasions of her use, Applicant was not employed as a federal contractor 
or in any other positon directly or immediately affecting public safety. Applicant also 
disclosed in August 2011 that she received marijuana edibles in the mail. Applicant’s 
boyfriend suffers from a chronic medical condition and legally used marijuana under the 
terms of a medical marijuana license he obtained in State A. According to Applicant, her 
boyfriend sent a package containing his medical marijuana to her in State B, a state that 
does not permit medical marijuana, in advance of his move to join her. He did so without 
her knowledge and she did not learn of the package’s contents until she opened it. In 
her subject interview, Applicant told the investigator that her boyfriend has never 
purchased marijuana illegally and he has no plans to do so in the future.3  
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since 2012. On her security clearance 
application, Applicant indicated intent not to use illegal drugs in the future, stating, 
“Unless the drug is ruled constitutionally and federally legal (as with alcohol), I do not 
intend to use this drug. I want to ensure that I am fully compliant as I move towards 
clearance.” She clarified this statement in her answer to the SOR, “. . . [I]f the drug was . 
. . legalized, I would consider use again. . . . I would like it to be known that if these 
legalizations occur, I do not intend to use it if my workplace or state has stricter 
regulations.”4 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3-4. 
 
4 GE  2-3.  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Use of an illegal drug raises concerns about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.5 Applicant admitted disqualifying conduct 
under the drug involvement guideline; specifically, using marijuana on eight occasions 
between 2002 and 2012 and possession of marijuana after her boyfriend sent a 
package containing the drug to her home in 2011.6  
 
However, the record does contain information to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s past drug involvement. The 2011 incident where Applicant 
unexpectedly received a package of marijuana in the mail is mitigated as a one-time 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 24. 
 
6 AG ¶ 25(a) and (c). 
 
 
4 
 
event that does not negatively reflect her current security worthiness.7 Applicant has not 
used the drug since 2012, establishing an appropriate period of abstinence from her 
casual use of marijuana. The circumstances of her use are not indicative of an ongoing 
issue and occurred well before her employment as a federal contractor. Furthermore, 
she has clearly stated intent not to use drugs illegally in violation of federal law, her 
responsibilities as a clearance holder, or her employer’s policies.8  
 
As an argument against mitigation, the Government posits that Applicant’s 
ongoing relationship with her boyfriend increases the likelihood that she will use 
marijuana again despite her statements to contrary. The Government’s argument is 
speculative. Applicant’s boyfriend possessed and used marijuana under the terms of a 
medical marijuana license in another state. There is no indication in the record that he is 
continuing to use, acquire, or possess the drug now that he and Applicant are living in a 
state that does not permit such usage. Accordingly, there is no evidence in the record to 
diminish the credibility of Applicant’s statements of future intent. Her past use of 
marijuana is mitigated.  
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant 
truthfully and candidly disclosed her past marijuana use. Her ability to provide full, frank, 
and candid answers is an indication that she understands the gravity of the fiduciary 
relationship she seeks to enter into with the Government. Her statements regarding her 
future intentions to abstain from illegal drug use also demonstrate that she understands 
the restrictions on personal behaviors attendant to the privilege of having access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
_________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
8 AG ¶ 26(b). 
