1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-05377 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. The DOD issued to Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated January 6, 2015, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 29, 2015. He admitted the seven 
financial allegations of delinquent debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on September 30, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. The 
DOD issued a notice of hearing on December 2, 2015, scheduling a hearing for 
December 16, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered 
three exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1, 2 and 3. Applicant testified and submitted two exhibits that 
I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A 
and B. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant 
timely submitted one set of documents consisting of seven pages that I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as AX C. (GX 4, e-Mail, dated December 22, 
2015) I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 52 years old. He served three years on active duty in the Air Force 
from 1981 to 1984. He has been a senior network engineer for 20 years. He was 
married for over 18 years, but divorced in September 2010. He and his wife had two 
sons. One is grown and out of the household. The other is a teen ager. He and his wife 
share custody of this child. He pays $900 monthly in child support. Applicant’s net 
monthly pay is approximately $4,000, and his monthly expenses are also approximately 
$4,000, including his child support payments. He has little if any discretionary funds.(Tr. 
18-20, 28-30) 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 2, dated June 24, 2015; GX 3, dated 
March 4, 2014) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a medical debt for 
$119 (SOR 1.a); a credit card debt in collection for $670 (SOR 1.b); a cell phone debt in 
collection for $211 (SOR 1.c); the remainder from the short sale of a house for $36,573 
(SOR 1.d); a utility debt in collection for $120 (SOR 1.e); a cable service account in 
collection for $530 (SOR 1.f); and a traffic ticket from a city for $250 (SOR 1.g). Over 
90% of the delinquent debt is the remainder from the short sale of the house.  
Applicant stayed in the family house for approximately a year after he and his 
wife divorced. Since he and his wife shared custody of their youngest child, the boy 
lives with him every other week. Applicant attempted to sell the marital house during this 
time. Applicant was current with the mortgage, but, after a year, the house sold at a 
short sale for less than the amount of the mortgage. He was left with the deficit listed at 
SOR 1.d. He could not afford to pay all of family debts after losing his wife’s income and 
having to pay child support. He had other smaller debts that were accumulated during 
and after the marriage. Applicant was unaware of some of these debts until he was 
advised of them during the security clearance process.  
Applicant realized that he could never pay off the remaining house debt. After the 
short sale, he consulted an attorney to determine how best to manage his delinquent 
3 
 
debts. He also needed to resolve his delinquent debts to obtain a security clearance. 
The attorney advised him to file a bankruptcy petition to resolve his debts. The attorney 
informed Applicant he did not qualify for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, so he had to file a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant and his attorney took all of Applicant’s debts, including 
all debts considered a security concern, and included them in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition. Applicant filed the Chapter 7 bankruptcy on April 27, 2015, and his debts were 
discharged on July 28, 2015. All of the debts listed in the SOR were included in the 
bankruptcy and have been discharged. (Tr.12-20 28-36; AX A, Bankruptcy Discharge, 
dated July 28, 2015; AX C, Bankruptcy Schedules)  
Before or after the bankruptcy was granted, Applicant realized that he needed a 
car for transportation. He had the car debt removed from the bankruptcy list and 
reinstated as a debt. He is current with the payments for this debt. (AX B, Statement of 
Review, dated July 23, 2015)    
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant could not pay all of the accumulated family debt after his divorce in 
September 2010. He incurred delinquent debt for unpaid family debts and from the short 
sale of the family house. Applicant’s delinquent debts are sufficient to raise security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates an inability rather than an unwillingness to satisfy 
debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
5 
 
These mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are the result of 
his 2010 divorce, the requirement to pay child support, and the short sale of the marital 
house. His largest debt by far is the remainder from the short sale of his house. These 
events occurred under unusual circumstance and were largely beyond his control. He 
acted responsibly by filing a bankruptcy petition and including all of the SOR debts in 
that petition. Applicant received financial counseling as required for filing a bankruptcy 
petition.  
 
For a good-faith effort under AG ¶ 20(d), there must be an ability to repay the 
debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts is needed. Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt 
payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt 
through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant established a reasonable plan to resolve his financial problems and 
has a meaningful track record of debt payment. He filed a bankruptcy petition and 
included all of his debts in the petition. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of 
resolving debt. Applicant has shown that he is managing his personal financial 
obligations reasonably and responsibly, and his financial problems are behind him. 
There is ample evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based 
on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s three years 
of active Air Force service and his over 20 years as a senior network engineer. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt as a result of his divorce and the necessity to sell 
short the marital home. Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that he 
acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances. There is clear evidence that he 
will continue to responsibly manage his financial obligations. There is ample evidence of 
honesty, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
