The Government submitted seven items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03520
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 20, 2016.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated September
28, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on October 27, 2015. Applicant did not submit1
any response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
The Government moved to amend the SOR in the FORM based on new debts in a recent credit report in      2
the record. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR and the FORM on October 27, 2015. The motion to
amend the SOR is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the original SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation (1.a)
under Guideline F. She also provided explanations. An amended SOR was included in
the FORM.  Applicant did not respond to the additional allegations in the amended SOR2
1.b-1.i.
Applicant is 33 years old. She is divorced and has one son. She graduated from
high school in 1998, and she attends college at the present time. She served in the
U.S. Air Force from 2000 to 2006, receiving an honorable discharge. (Item 3) Since
2007, she has been employed with her current employer. She completed an application
for a security clearance in July 2013. (Item 3) She has held a security clearance since
about 2008.
Financial
The original SOR alleges an indebtedness to a mortgage company for a second
mortgage that is past-due in the approximate amount of $59,662. 
Applicant acknowledged the foreclosure action on her home after her adjusted
mortgage increased and she was unable to short-sell the home. She denied current
responsibility for the mortgage based on a state non-recourse statute. Regardless of
the state deficiency statute, there has been no evidence presented to substantiate
Applicant’s attempt or efforts to resolve the delinquent mortgage account prior to the
2011 foreclosure, or to show the status of her personal financial condition at the time
leading up to the foreclosure. The record reflects that Applicant has been with her
current employer since 2007. (Item 2)
Applicant’s May 2014 response to interrogatories stated that she was still trying
to make arrangements on the mortgage debt. She also listed some delinquent medical
debts that she paid in 2014 and provided bank transaction printouts. (Item 6)
The amended SOR listed charged-off accounts totaling approximately $16,070,
and a mortgage account that has been foreclosed. The latest credit report reflects these
additional delinquent debts. (Item 7) Applicant did not provide any evidence of
payments or a plan to address these debts.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
3
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
4
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant‘s second mortgage account on her home was past due in the amount
of $59,662. Her home went to foreclosure in 2011.She has incurred additional
delinquent debt in the amount of $16,070. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate
security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s reliance on the
state deficiency statute does not provide mitigation. In her 2014 interrogatories she
listed other delinquent debts that she was just addressing. However, new delinquent
debts appear on the latest credit report. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant has worked since 2007. She did not provide  any information
that would allow this mitigating condition to apply. She did not produce any
documentation that she acted responsibly under the circumstances.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. There is no evidence in the record
to support actions taken by Applicant before her home went to foreclosure. The record
5
is silent as to financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply. Absent documentary
evidence in support of efforts to resolve the mortgage or to deal with the mortgage
company before the foreclosure of her home, her current financial status and future
ability to meet financial obligations remain a question because there are no indications
her financial problems are being resolved or under control. She has new delinquent
debts contained in a recent credit report.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the Applicant. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 33-year-old single mother. She served in the military and received an
honorable discharge. She has been employed since 2007. Her reliance on a state
deficiency statute is not sufficient to mitigate the case as she has not presented any
documentation to show she acted responsibly before the foreclosure.
Additionally, there is continuing evidence of an ongoing pattern of financial
irresponsibility as shown in Applicant’s previous delinquent debts paid as a result of
financial interrogatories, and new delinquent debts as disclosed in the latest credit
bureau report. The new delinquent debts were reported delinquent in 2014 and 2015,
many reported months within her paying-off old delinquencies as noted in her
interrogatory response. She has not provided any information to carry her burden of
mitigation in this case.
The Government’s evidence as contained in this FORM reflects Applicant’s
inability or unwillingness to fully meet her financial obligations. Applicants unresolved
6
delinquent debts combined with her inability to meet financial obligations and apparent
financial distress establishes unmitigated security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline. Absent documentary evidence in support of resolution of the
SOR debts, information on her current financial status and future ability to meet
financial obligations, mitigation credit is not appropriate.
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
