 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02423 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant failed to present sufficient information to 
mitigate psychological conditions security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance to qualify for a security 
guard position with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in 
her background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and 
Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOD adjudicators could not make the 
preliminary affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On March 19, 
2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for psychological conditions under Guideline I. These actions were taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
 
2 
 
 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 24, 2015. She admitted the two allegations 
under Guideline I. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 21, 2015, and the case was 
assigned to me on August 31, 2015. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 2, 
2015, for a hearing on October 14, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered five exhibits which I marked and admitted into the record without 
objections as Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant and one witness 
testified. I left the record open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant 
timely submitted two documents that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A and B. (GX 6, e-mail, dated December 16, 2015) 
DOD received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 22, 2015. The record closed 
on December 16, 2015, on receipt of Applicant’s post-hearing documents.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old 2011 college graduate with a Bachelor of Science 
degree. She completed all of her course work on time in four years. She is taking on-
line courses working towards her master’s degree while working as a public service 
counselor in a library. She requires a security clearance for a new position she has 
accepted as a security guard for a defense contractor at a sensitive compartmented 
information facility (SCIF). She is single and living at home with her parents. (Tr. 11, 15-
16; 39-40; GX 1, e-QIP, dated May 12, 2014)  
 
The SOR alleges that on January 29, 2015, a government-retained duly qualified 
mental health professional diagnosed Applicant with an unspecified depressive 
disorder, which may have an impact on Applicant’s judgment and reliability. The mental 
health professional opined that Applicant’s prognosis was guarded because of 
Applicant’s history of prematurely terminating therapy and medication management 
(SOR 1.a). It was further alleged that the government-retained mental health 
professional diagnosed Applicant with mood disorder, bipolar disorder, and a history of 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The mental health professional noted that these 
conditions appear to have adversely affected Applicant’s judgment in the past. (SOR 
1.b) 
 
Applicant started to see a mental health therapist in November 2008 while in her 
second year of college. Applicant had adjusted to being a college student in her first 
year of college. In her second year, Applicant was feeling left out and floundering in her 
student responsibilities as well as in her relationships with her parents and friends. She 
sought counseling at the school’s mental health facility to try to balance the actions in 
 
3 
 
 
her life. Her assigned therapist was another student studying to be a licensed therapist. 
On the evening she returned to campus from the winter break in January 2009, 
Applicant sent a letter to the therapist indicating the she was having suicidal and 
homicidal thoughts towards a friend. In addition, her grandmother passed which 
adversely affected her. She had no outlet for her feelings, so she e-mailed the therapist 
telling her about her feelings and thoughts. She wanted to get help for what she 
considered abnormal feelings. (Tr. 17-19) 
 
Applicant’s therapist referred her to an inpatient mental health treatment facility. 
Applicant was admitted to the facility as a voluntary admission for depression and 
suicidal thoughts on January 30, 2009. Applicant stated she had become depressed 
and was sad and angry without reason. She felt like she may harm herself. Applicant 
also reported that she was abusing alcohol. At the mental health facility, she was initially 
diagnosed with depression and bi-polar. (GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated 
February 7, 2014, at 4-5; GX, 2, Response to Interrogatories, dated August 13, 2014; 
GX 4, Psychiatric Admission Notes, date January 30, 2009, at 1-9) 
 
Applicant spent ten days at the facility. She was prescribed Prozax and Lithium. 
She participated in group and individual therapy with varying degrees of participation. At 
times, she was somewhat difficult to engage in treatment. She slowly progressed. After 
a few days at the facility, she was feeling better and ready to return to her college 
studies. She also denied any thoughts to harm herself or others. She was willing to work 
with her therapist and see a psychiatrist on a regular basis. Applicant was discharged 
on February 10, 2009, with a good diagnosis as long as she remained in treatment and 
followed her medications. (Tr. 19-20; GX 4, Treatment Records, at 25-28) 
 
Applicant was followed by a therapist at her school after leaving the mental 
health facility. Her priorities were to go to counseling and to class. She discontinued 
taking her medications in March 2009 because she was not focusing in class. She 
talked to her therapist before stopping her medications. The therapist encouraged her to 
continue the medications. (Tr. 20-22) 
 
Applicant returned to the same mental health facility on April 30, 2009, and she 
was seen by a psychiatrist. At the time, she was having a panic attack and had 
ideations of harming herself and others. She was started back on medications that were 
different from her previous medications. She later told her doctor that she was still 
having trouble focusing in class, so he changed her medications. Clinical notes 
indicated that her prognosis was good, if she remained in treatment and on 
medications. She continued to see the psychiatrist weekly until May when the semester 
ended, and she returned home. (Tr. 22-26) 
 
During the summer, she continued to take her medications until shortly before 
returning to school in August 2009. She does not know why she discontinued the 
medications except she now considers that it was probably a bad decision by her. 
During that year in school, her third year, she was stable, and she took on additional 
responsibilities in the school as well as in extracurricular activities. She felt that she had 
 
4 
 
 
returned to the same mental status she had as a first-year student. She occasionally 
saw a school therapist. She continued to use the coping mechanisms that she learned 
during her in-patient stay. (Tr. 26-31)  
 
Applicant returned to the mental health facility in April 2010. She was evaluated 
by one of the facility’s psychiatrists because she felt stressed and she was experiencing 
grief within her family. She knew that grief and stress are large causes of her mental 
health instability. The psychiatrist put her on Prozec, Lamictal, and Abilify. Her mood 
and mental stability improved. She did not have any therapy sessions with the 
psychiatrist since, shortly after, he left the facility. She did not seek out any other 
therapist or psychiatrist.  
 
Applicant stopped taking the medications during the summer of 2010. While a 
student, she went off her medications mostly during the summer breaks from school. 
She had free time during the summers and felt she was not under stress requiring 
medication. Applicant is not concerned about stopping the medication and regressing 
back into depression and hallucinations. She knows what triggers the adverse mental 
health reactions, and she knows how to avoid the triggers. She has been able to alter 
her lifestyle to avoid the issue and circumstances that cause her stress. She feels that 
using her coping skills is better than taking the medication. (Tr. 31-37, 40-41) 
 
Applicant was evaluated by a licensed clinical psychologist at the request of the 
Government in January 2015. The psychologist administered some personality and 
depression tests. The results were unremarkable. The psychologist interviewed 
Applicant for over an hour. The psychologist opined that Applicant lacks self-awareness 
and has difficulty with self-examination. Her emotional maturity is childlike, and she 
lacks a consistent, well-defined coping style. She is self-centered, infantile in her 
expectations of others, and her approach to life. She appears withdrawn and describes 
herself as “clingy” and “needy” in relationships. She is easily frustrated particularly when 
she is unable to complete a task or unable to fix issues. She indicated that she 
becomes nervous when talking to strangers. She reported a history of panic attacks, 
particularly around large numbers of people.  
 
The psychologist concluded that Applicant has limited psychological resources to 
cope with stressful events. She is vulnerable to becoming depressed, which may have 
an impact on her judgment and reliability. Her previous attempts at therapy and 
medication management were prematurely terminated. The psychologist opined that 
Applicant’s overall prognosis is guarded, and the probability of a recurrent emotional 
crisis is high. The psychologist also noted that Applicant meets the criteria for an 
unspecified depressive disorder. There is little evidence to suggest that her diagnosis 
would have an impact on her future judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. However, 
her previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder, PTSD, and mood disorder appears to have 
adversely affected her judgment, but it is unclear if the circumstances had an impact on 
her reliability and trustworthiness. (GX 3, Confidential Psychological Evaluation, dated 
January 29, 2015) 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant disagreed with some of the conclusions of the psychologist, but she 
also recognized that the psychologist is a professional. She felt the evaluation was not 
fair, impartial, or a good evaluation of her abilities, mood, and condition. Applicant 
believed she can recognize the symptoms of a decline in her mental health so as to 
trigger her to seek professional help. She stated that her mental health now is fine, she 
did not feel depressed, and she had no suicidal or homicidal thoughts. Applicant also 
stated that she has not been on medication for over five years and had not seen a 
therapist or psychologist, except for the government–ordered evaluation, since 2010, a 
period of over five years. She did not feel that she required treatment to overcome her 
anxieties, bipolar, and mood issues. (Tr. 37-46) 
 
One of Applicant’s four college classmates for the entire time she was in college, 
testified that she has known Applicant since they met during their first year of college at 
an honors dinner. They had classes and socialized together with other students. They 
both had a difficult time in their second year of school and confided in each other. When 
Applicant went to the mental health facility in 2009, she and the other roommates visited 
Applicant. The witness also accompanied Applicant to see the psychiatrist in April 2010. 
She had seen Applicant deal with all of the stress that caused her mental health issues. 
Applicant had a difficult time sleeping, focusing, and was upset often. During their third 
year of college, Applicant had a heavy course load and held more responsibilities in 
class and in the school. She appeared to manage the situations appropriately. Applicant 
started taking her medications at the suggestion of the psychiatrist in April 2010. The 
witness noted that their final year of college was easier. Applicant seemed to be back to 
her normal self.  
 
After graduation, Applicant and the witness went their separate ways for a while. 
They gradually renewed their friendship when they started to live closer together. The 
witness noted that she knew Applicant before, during, and after she experienced her 
mental health issues. Applicant is significantly more mature now than as a first-year 
college student, and she has grown significantly in her outlook. She accomplished this 
without medication. (Tr. 47-55)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant consulted a licensed clinical social worker mental 
health professional. The mental health professional recommended that Applicant 
receive additional therapy with a goal of enhanced ability to effectively cope with the full 
variety of life’s anxieties. After therapy, Applicant should be able to verbalize an 
understanding of the role fearful thinking plays in creating fears, excessive worry, and 
persistent anxiety symptoms. She must be able to identify, challenge, and replace 
fearful self-talk with positive, realistic, and empowering self-talk. To accomplish these 
goals, Applicant should receive counseling and treatment every two weeks for at least 
six months. (AX A, Report, dated November 15, 2015) In her e-mail forwarding the 
report, Applicant stated that she would see the mental health professional for the next 
six months for an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed moods. Also 
on the recommendation of the mental health professional, Applicant met with a 
psychiatrist and was prescribed medications for depression and anxiety. (AX B, e-mail, 
date December 16, 2015) 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Psychological Conditions 
 
 A security concern is raised because certain emotional, mental, and personality 
conditions can impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a 
 
7 
 
 
disorder is not required for there to be a concern under this guideline, A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g. clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S, Government, should be consulted when 
evaluating potentially disqualifying or mitigating information under this guideline. (AG ¶ 
27) 
 The Government presented Applicant’s medical records from the mental health 
facility. The medical records included reports and evaluations by two psychologists and 
a psychiatrist. The medical records and reports showed that Applicant was treated and 
diagnosed with major depression and mood disorder. She was prescribed various 
medications for her condition. An evaluation by a Government psychologist indicated 
that Applicant’s mental health condition had a negative impact on her judgment, but it is 
not clear if it had an impact on her reliability or trustworthiness. The medical information 
and reports raised the following Psychological Conditions Disqualifying Conditions 
under AG ¶ 28: 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, violent, paranoid, or 
bizarre behavior;  
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline but may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
I considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29: 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional;  
(c) recent opinion by  a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation:  
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g. one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
 
8 
 
 
resolved, and the individual no longer has indications of emotional 
instability; and  
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant’s mental health issues 
may have been caused by stress and grief, the condition is not temporary since 
Applicant has had mental health conditions on and off for over eight years. She 
continues to experience the same or similar mental health issues. Applicant’s condition 
has been controllable in the past with treatment and medications, but Applicant has not 
shown a consistent compliance with prescribed treatment plans, including taking her 
medications. The latest mental health report submitted by Applicant shows that she 
requires further therapy and counseling, and a psychiatrist has prescribed additional 
medications for Applicant. The opinion of the psychologist that evaluated Applicant’s at 
her request after the hearing does not clearly indicate that Applicant’s condition is under 
control or in remission and that she has a low probability of recurrence or exacerbation 
of her condition, It is gratifying to see that Applicant is complying with the 
recommendations for additional treatment and therapy. This indicates that there is still a 
current problem.  
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is still experiencing mental 
health issues that could affect her judgment, reliability and good judgment. It is good 
that Applicant is willingly complying with a treatment plan and medications that could 
ameliorate her mental health issues. She has received treatment and medication in the 
past, but she has not always continued to comply with the prescribed treatment and 
medication. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration so 
 
9 
 
 
that any doubt about granting an individual access to classified information must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. Applicant’s continued treatment for mental 
health issues, and her history of not continuing to follow her treatment plans and 
medications show that Applicant may not have good judgment and be reliable and 
trustworthy. This indicates she may not have the ability to protect classified information. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated psychological conditions security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
