 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-02154 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his criminal conduct. In 
August 2013, he stole another’s property and money. At the time, he had been working 
as a federal contractor and had held a security clearance for over a decade. The 
circumstances surrounding his conduct and his failure to take responsibility for his 
criminal behavior raise continuing concerns about his judgment, reliability, and the 
likelihood of recurrence of similar conduct in the future. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his past conduct and 
circumstances raised security concerns under the criminal conduct guideline.1 On June 
30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On August 3, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the SOR, Applicant’s answer, and 
five documentary exhibits. These documents were admitted into the record without 
objection as Exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 7.2 On August 31, 2015, Applicant received the FORM 
and was informed he had 30 days to file a response.3 He did not to submit a response. 
 
 On December 1, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. I opened the record to 
provide him a final opportunity to submit a response to the FORM and any other 
documents in support of his case.4 Applicant timely submitted three documents, which 
were admitted into the record without objection as Ex. A – C.5 The record originally 
closed on December 15, 2015. 
 
 On January 4, 2016, Applicant submitted an additional document showing that a 
state court had granted his request for early termination of probation. Department 
Counsel had no objection to the late submission.6 I reopened the record and admitted 
the document as Ex. D. The record closed on January 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 35, has a bachelor’s and a master’s degree in computer engineering. 
He has been a federal contractor and worked for his current employer since 2002. He 
has held a security clearance for about 15 years, and previously was granted access to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI). On a recent security clearance application, 
Applicant disclosed that in 2003 he was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI).7 
(Ex. 5 at 36) 
 
In August 2013, Applicant went out for drinks with a friend. Applicant reports they 
went to an “open bar” and he consumed two beers and two shots of whiskey. (Ex. 6 at 
3) Around midnight, Applicant decided to go to an adult establishment (strip club). He 
was arrested after a dancer at the establishment accused him of stealing her purse, 
which contained $300 in cash and a smart phone. The dancer told police and provided 
a written statement that while performing she put her purse down and then noticed it 
had gone missing. She saw Applicant walking away suspiciously, confronted him, and 
pulled her purse out of his pocket. Another worker at the establishment, a bouncer, 
corroborated the dancer’s accusation to police and also provided a written statement.  
                                                          
2 Exhibits 1 – 7 consist of: the SOR, Answer, a police report, a state court order, Applicant’s security 
clearance application, a summary of Applicant’s security clearance interview, and an incident report. 
 
3 Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. 
 
4 Hx. II. 
 
5 Exhibits A – C consist of: a letter from Applicant’s probation officer, e-mail correspondence from his 
counsel regarding his criminal case, and a filing in his state court criminal case. See also, Hx. III. 
 
6 Hx. IV. 
 
7 The DUI is only being considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case and whole-person factors. 
 
3 
 
 
When confronted by police, Applicant initially agreed to speak and denied the 
allegation. After the police informed Applicant that there was a witness to the crime, he 
refused to answer any further questions. He was arrested on a felony larceny charge. 
(Ex. 3 at 5) Four days later, Applicant reported the arrest to his employer’s facility 
security officer (FSO). (Ex. 7) 
 
In January 2014, Applicant pled no contest to the felony larceny charge. (Ex. 4; 
Ex. C) He was placed on probation for three years. He timely reported the disposition of 
the criminal case to his FSO.  
 
In December 2015, a judge granted Applicant’s motion for early termination of 
probation. The probation department had no objection to Applicant’s request for early 
termination because “[s]ince being placed under supervision, the [Applicant] has 
reported as instructed, maintained stable housing, employment, and has remained drug 
free.” (Ex. C) 
 
Applicant maintains his innocence. Although he regrets putting himself in the 
situation that led to his arrest, he states he only entered the no contest plea to avoid the 
risk of losing his job and security clearance. He believes the dancer was vindictive, but 
provides no further elaboration for the dancer’s purported bad motive. (Ex. 2)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
 
4 
 
 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The criminal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant claims he did not commit the larceny offense for which he was 
arrested, entered a plea of no contest, and was placed on probation for three years. 
Recently, a state court granted his request for early termination of probation. However, 
the state court’s action did not absolve him of the crime. He presented no corroborating 
evidence to substantiate his claim of innocence or that undercuts the Government’s 
evidence, namely, the police report wherein the victim and a witness identified him as 
the person who stole the purse. He now claims that the victim accused him of the crime 
because she was vindictive. He provides no evidence to support this claim; much less a 
reasonable explanation as to why two employees of an adult establishment would 
conspire to have him arrested on false charges and, thereby, lose his potential 
patronage. Accordingly, I find that the Government proved by substantial evidence the 
SOR allegation, namely, that Applicant committed the larceny offense. See ISCR Case 
No. 05-02422 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2007) (Defining substantial evidence standard as 
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a 
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”)  
 
 Furthermore, I find that Applicant’s commission of the larceny offense raises the 
criminal conduct security concern, and triggers application of the following disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
 
5 
 
 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of mitigating conditions. I have considered 
all the mitigating conditions and only the following warrant further discussion: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.8 
 
 Applicant’s recent criminal offense occurred in 2013. He has complied with the 
terms of his probation and a state court found that he had established sufficient 
responsible conduct in the intervening 30 months to grant his request for early 
termination of probation. However, he refuses to acknowledge and take responsibility 
for his crime which undercuts this favorable evidence. ISCR Case No. 03-01009 at 5 
(Mar. 29, 2005) (an applicant undermines his/her claim of mitigation by refusing to take 
responsibility for their security-significant conduct). 
 
 Moreover, the circumstances under which the crime occurred continue to raise 
questions about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and the potential of recurrence of a 
similar incident. Of note, Applicant had been working as a cleared federal contractor for 
over a decade when he decided to steal another’s property and money. He was an adult 
in his early thirties at the time of the incident.9 His good behavior since the incident is 
commendable and may with additional time without recurrence of questionable behavior 
indicate true reform that would permit a favorable adjudication. However, at this point, it 
is too soon for such a favorable conclusion. Of note, Applicant’s good behavior over the 
past 30 months has primarily taken place while he was being regular monitored by state 
authorities and any violation of the terms of his probation would have resulted in grave 
legal consequences. It has now only been a little over a month since his probation 
ended. Under the circumstances, an insufficient amount of time has passed for me to 
safely conclude that Applicant has re-established his eligibility for continued access to 
this nation’s secrets. Consequently, I find that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) partially apply, but 
are insufficient at this point to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
                                                          
8 AG ¶32(c) does not apply for reasons already discussed above, namely, Applicant failed to establish 
that he did not commit the larceny offense.  
 
9 Furthermore, Applicant had been granted a security clearance after a 2003 DUI. This earlier alcohol-
related criminal incident apparently had limited positive effect on Applicant as 10 years later, after 
consuming alcohol and potentially still under its effects, he decided to once again break the law. 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline J. 
I gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, to 
include Applicant’s self-report of the criminal conduct. However, his failure to 
acknowledge his criminal behavior and the circumstances under which the criminal 
conduct occurred continue to raise serious concerns about his judgment, reliability, and 
the likelihood of recurrence of similar conduct. Accordingly, after weighing the favorable 
and unfavorable evidence, I find that Applicant failed to meet his burden in mitigating 
the security concerns at issue. ISCR Case No. 14-00715 at 3 (Dec. 10, 2014) (“once 
security concerns are raised, either through an applicant’s admissions or through 
evidence provided by the Government, it is the applicant’s responsibility to present 
evidence in mitigation.”) 
 
 A security clearance determination is not intended to punish a person for past 
conduct or circumstances. Instead, these decisions serve as predictive judgments about 
an individual’s security suitability, where the person’s past conduct is the best indicator 
of future behavior.11 Here, the record reflects questionable behavior on Applicant’s part 
that led him to commit a serious criminal offense. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with doubts about his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
10 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 
(App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an exact science, but rather 
predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that person's past conduct and 
present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
