                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )    ISCR Case No. 14-03795
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On January 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 5, 2015, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 12, 2015, and  responded to the FORM
within the time permitted with post-FORM submissions. The case was assigned to me
on January 16, 2016. Her submissions consisted of explanations and clarifications of
her alleged five delinquent accounts listed in the SOR with documented attachments
addressing her accounts. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as Item 8.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated five delinquent debts
exceeding $120,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the FORM, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. She claimed she was laid off by her former employer in July 2013 and
most recently became employed again. She claimed she is working with her mortgage
lender (creditor 1.a) to obtain a loan modification. She claimed she and her husband
entered into a debt consolidation agreement, paid off one of the debts (creditor 1.c),
and are making payments on another debt (creditor 1.b) She claimed she is unable to
make any payments on the remaining two debts at this time due to her decrease in
salary and her family’s basic living expenses.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 39-year-old senior business analyst for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in August 1994 and has one child (age 7) from this marriage
and one stepchild (age 22). She attended college classes between August 1995 and
May 1999 and earned a bachelor’s degree from a recognized university. (Item 3) She
returned to college in January 2001 and earned a master’s degree in August 2003.
(Item 3) Applicant claimed no military service.
Finances
Applicant and her husband purchased a home in July 2006 and financed their
purchase with a first mortgage of $368,231 with creditor 1.a. (Items 5 and 7) When
Applicant was laid off by her employer in July 2013, she could longer make her
mortgage payments on her loan balance at the time in the amount of $380,819. (Items
5-7)  Since returning to work with her new employer in September 2014 , Applicant has
worked with her lender to obtain a modification of her loan. (Items 2 and 8) 
Included in Applicant’s post-FORM submissions is an application for mortgage
assistance from her lender. (Item 8) She provided supporting financial documentation
3
with her application.  In the lender’s December 2013 response, the lender confirmed its
careful review of Applicant’s request and found that based on the information furnished
she is not eligible for mortgage assistance. (Item 8) One of the noted reasons was
Applicant’s pending bankruptcy petition. (Item 8) Applicant did not include her
bankruptcy petition in her furnished materials, and as a result, nothing is known about
the filing date,  contents of the schedules, or status of the petition. In its December
2013 response to Applicant, creditor 1.a provided a number of options for Applicant.
Whether Applicant has taken advantage of any of these suggested options is unclear.
In January 2014, creditor 1.a provided an updated response to the materials
furnished by Applicant in support of her mortgage assistance application.  Creditor 1.a
suggested Applicant access the creditor’s web-site to ascertain what additional
documents the creditor needed to complete Applicant’s application review. (Item 8)
Creditor 1.a acknowledged its receipt of Applicant’s previous submissions without
validating her eligibility for mortgage assistance.
In February 2015 and March 2015, creditor 1.a affirmed again its receipt of
Applicant’s documentation supporting her mortgage assistance application. (Item 8) In
April 2015, the lender offered Applicant an FHA affordable modified program trial plan,
while declining her request for immediate loan modification and repayment assistance.
(Item 8) Scheduled monthly trial program payments were to commence in May 2015 in
the amount of $2,237. (Item 8) To date, Applicant has not provided any documentation
of her acceptance of creditor 1.a’s trial plan or payments called for under the plan.
Satisfied with her payment progress, creditor 1.a approved a permanent
modification of Applicant’s mortgage in August 2015 with a new principal balance of
$351,245 and scheduled monthly payments of $1,228. (Item 8) Since returning to work
in September 2014, Applicant has provided no evidence of payments made to creditor
1.a on her modified mortgage. 
Besides her mortgage debt with creditor 1.a, Applicant accumulated a number of
delinquent consumer debts. Credit reports document debts with creditor 1.b ($2,210);
creditor 1.c ($1,277), creditor 1.d ($9,112); and creditor 1.e ($23,266). (Items 5 and 7)
Applicant documented her payment plans with creditor 1.d that called for monthly
payments of $688 and with creditor 1.e on a reduced amount of $6,980, subject to
payment of $4,000 for the first month and bi-weekly payments of $596 thereafter. (Item
8) Applicant completed her scheduled  repayments of her creditor 1.e debt, and creditor
1.e confirmed her compliance with creditor 1.e’s repayment terms in a November 2013
letter to Applicant. (Items 2 and 8) 
In October 2010, Applicant engaged a debt consolidation firm to help her with
her delinquent debts. (Item 8) In her debt information submission, she listed her
mortgage balance of $366,000 and additional debts of $53,000. Monthly program
payments were set at $886 a month, beginning in October 2010. (Item 8) Applicant’s
budget analysis listed total monthly income of $6,900. Included in her consolidation
package was a list of her creditor 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e debts. She provided no record of any
payments to the debt consolidation firm and provided no news articles claiming the firm
4
was under investigation for consumer fraud. While she assured she has been paying
$50 a month on her creditor 1.d debt, she furnished no documentation of her payments.
Applicant provided no additional documentation of her resolution of her
remaining debts with creditors 1.b-1.c and creditor 1.e, and these debts remain
outstanding. She claims she no longer uses credit cards and is living within her means.
Without more documentation of her payment initiatives, including evidence of financial
counseling, an updated credit report, and a personal financial statement covering her
family income and expenses, her claims cannot be verified and credited to her.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
5
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and the evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed senior business analyst of a defense contractor
who accumulated delinquent debts that she has failed to fully resolve. Applicant
attributed her debt delinquencies to a major layoff in 2013 and her reduced income
from her current employment. While she has since paid one of her listed debts and is
making small monthly payments on another debt, she has failed to document any
payment initiatives on her modified mortgage and remaining listed debt. Further, she
has failed to provide any documented evidence of financial counseling or detailed
plan for resolving her remaining debts.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrants the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation. 
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her listed mortgage and other
consumer debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s debts are fully
documented in her credit reports. Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s
demonstrated handling of her finances, highlighted by the five delinquent debts listed
in the SOR. Since returning to full-time work in 2013, she has taken insufficient
corrective steps to resolve her delinquencies, provide a financial statement covering
her current income and expenses, utilize financial counseling, and demonstrate she
acted responsibly in addressing her listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Inferentially, Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts are attributable for the
most part to her period of unemployment and ensuing income shortages. Afforded an
opportunity to supplement the record, she provided some documentation of her efforts
in addressing her debts. Based on the developed record, however, it remains unclear
what steps she is taking to resolve her remaining debts with the income sources
available to her. 
On the basis of the documented materials in the FORM, Applicant is entitled to
the benefit of some extenuating circumstances associated with her inability to make
7
more payment progress with her debts. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” 
What is not clear from this developed record are the specifics of what payment
initiatives she has made to resolve her finances to stable levels. Whether she acted
responsibly is directly contingent upon her providing documented evidence of how she
addressed her finances. Without documentation of financial counseling and specific
steps she has taken, and is taking, to address her remaining delinquent debts,
mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed in the
record. Proof of payments to the remaining creditors listed in the SOR is potentially
important to assess the progress she is making in resolving the listed debts in the
SOR. Her failure to provide a meaningful track of a track record of payments prevents
her from meeting her burden of establishing her financial responsibility.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her failure to resolve her remaining delinquent debts.
Resolution of her delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to her regaining control
of her finances. While unemployment and income shortages might have played a
considerable role in her failures to mount more concerted efforts to address her
delinquent debts, Applicant failed to provide more specific post-layoff material for
consideration. 
Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in
making a whole-person assessment of her overall clearance eligibility, but were not
provided. Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising
out of her lack of more concerted initiatives to address her remaining delinquent
debts. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s lack of more specific explanations for her lack of more payment progress
with her listed debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about
Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily address her outstanding debts. More time is needed
to facilitate Applicant’s making the necessary progress with her debts to permit her
access to classified information. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d. Favorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraph 1.e.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
8
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.e:      For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
