 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-05691 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by her past consumption of 
marijuana-infused brownies while on vacation overseas. She has not been involved with 
any illegal drugs in over two years and established her past drug experimentation is 
unlikely to be repeated. However, Applicant did not mitigate the heightened security 
concerns raised by her deep and strong connections to her relatives living in China. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On May 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging that her past conduct and current circumstances raised 
security concerns under the drug involvement and foreign influence guidelines.1 
Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all the SOR allegations and requesting a 
hearing to establish her eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 11, 2015, Department Counsel notified the hearing office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. The hearing was scheduled, with the agreement of 
the parties, for November 12, 2015.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Applicant’s security clearance 
application (SCA) and the summaries of her security clearance background interviews. 
These documents were marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Exhibits 1 and 2, respectively. Applicant testified and offered Exhibit A. She timely 
submitted Exhibit B post-hearing. Both exhibits were admitted into the record without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 23, 2015, and the record 
closed on February 4, 2016.3  
 
Administrative Notice: People’s Republic of China (PRC or China) 
 
 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judges may 
accept for administrative notice uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts regarding a 
foreign country from official U.S. Government reports. Additionally, the official position of 
relevant federal agencies or the pertinent statements of key U.S. Government officials 
regarding a foreign country may be appropriate for administrative notice. The party 
requesting administrative notice of a particular matter must provide the source 
document, either the pertinent parts or the full document, to allow the judge and, if 
necessary, the Appeal Board to assess the reliability, accuracy, and relevancy of any 
administratively noticed fact. See generally, ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 
17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007).  
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain matters 
regarding China. Department Counsel’s request and the documents submitted in 
support of the request were collectively marked and included in the record as Exhibit 3. 
After reviewing the exhibit and conducting an independent review of the source 
documents cited in Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice, I find that 
the following are the pertinent facts regarding China:  
 
1. The PRC is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist 
Party is the paramount authority;  
 
2. China is actively engaged in intelligence gathering efforts against the 
United States; and  
 
3. China has a poor human rights record, where the repression and 
coercion of individuals and groups is routine.  
 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is the case management order and scheduling correspondence.  
 
3 See Hearing Exhibit V (remedying Department Counsel’s late production of the request for 
administrative notice and supporting documentation by providing Applicant extensive time post-hearing to 
review and respond to the matters requested for administrative notice). 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born in China. Her parents and grandparents were intellectuals 
who were persecuted by the PRC government. Her parents met in a PRC labor camp. 
When Applicant was about two years old, her father was given permission to leave 
China to further his education in the United States on condition he return to China after 
completing his studies. Upon completing his studies, Applicant’s father did not return to 
China. In retaliation, the PRC government would not allow Applicant or her mother to 
leave China. When Applicant was in grade school, her mother was able to leave China. 
Applicant was raised by her aunt and uncle until she was twelve. She was then allowed 
to leave China and joined her parents in the United States. Applicant credibly testified 
that because of this childhood experience she has “no love for the Chinese 
government.” (Tr. at 48-52) 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. She attended and graduated from high 
school in the United States. She earned her undergraduate degree in the United States. 
She is married to a U.S. citizen and they have two young children, who were born in the 
United States. She started working for her current employer in 2013. Within a few short 
months, she was promoted into a management position. She supervises about 10 
employees and contractors. She earns approximately $114,000 annually. She is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time to contribute to the efforts of her employer 
in support of the U.S. Government. (Tr. at 46, 55-62; Ex. 1 – 2)  
 
Applicant’s manager writes that he personally selected Applicant over others for 
her current position because she is “focused, determined, and committed to her team’s 
efforts.” He further states that he has received “high praise” regarding Applicant’s work 
from their customers. He fully supports her request for a security clearance. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant’s aunt and uncle who raised her until age 12 and the cousin she grew 
up with are residents and citizens of China. Applicant described her current contact with 
them as limited and infrequent due to her busy schedule. Notwithstanding her inability to 
speak more frequently with them, Applicant acknowledged the deep love she has for 
them, especially her aunt and cousin. Applicant’s uncle is retired and suffers from a 
debilitating illness. Her aunt is also retired and spends her time caring for her ill 
husband. Applicant’s aunt worked for a PRC-owned entity and receives a pension from 
the PRC government. Applicant’s cousin works for a private foreign company doing 
business in China. Applicant last visited China in 2001. She traveled to China to visit her 
aunt, uncle, and cousin. (Tr. at 48-55, 64-66, 88-91; Ex. 2) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, who is in seventies, was originally from the Ukraine and 
worked for the government before “the fall of communism.” He is a U.S. citizen. He 
recently married a woman, who is about 40 years younger and is also originally from 
Ukraine. She recently received U.S. residency status. Applicant limits her social 
 
4 
 
 
interaction with her father-in-law and his new wife.4 In the past, Applicant’s father-in-law 
traveled overseas and met with foreign nationals, to include government officials from 
Kyrgyzstan and South Korea, to further his far flung business ideas. Applicant is 
unaware whether these meetings resulted in any ongoing business relationships or 
contacts, but it appears highly unlikely. Applicant disclosed the information regarding 
her father-in-law and his foreign contacts on her SCA. Her father-in-law is currently 
retired and in bad health. He lives off social security and the financial support he 
receives from Applicant and her husband. Applicant’s father-in-law and his new wife live 
in the United States. (Tr. at 62-67; Ex. 1; Ex. A)  
 
 Applicant, before starting her current job, traveled overseas on vacation with her 
husband. While on vacation, Applicant bought and consumed marijuana-infused 
brownies. Applicant believed that her purchase and use of marijuana while on vacation 
was either legal or tacitly approved by the local authorities. She would not have bought 
and used the marijuana if she knew it was illegal for U.S. citizens to engage in such 
conduct overseas. She has not used any other illegal drugs and last used marijuana 
over two years ago. She disclosed her past drug use on her SCA and fully discussed it 
during her security clearance background interviews. When Applicant started her 
current job, she was required to take a pre-employment drug test. Her current employer 
has a drug-free workplace policy. She credibly testified that she will not use illegal drugs 
in the future. (Tr. at 45-48, 86-88; Ex. 1 at 50-51; Ex. 2 at 4) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
                                                          
4 In her SCA, Applicant explained her relationship with her father-in-law’s wife: “My father-in-law surprised 
us with his new wife on New Year’s eve 2013. I have no choice but to let her in my house whenever she 
comes over. She doesn’t speak much English so we don’t really communicate.” (Ex. 1 at 28) 
 
5 
 
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
Illegal drug involvement is potentially a security concern because: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) 
 
 Applicant’s past experimentation with marijuana raises the illegal drug 
involvement concern. It also raises the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 
25(c). The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the illegal 
drug involvement concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and only the 
following warrant further discussion: 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as . . . an appropriate period of abstinence. 
 
 Applicant only used marijuana while on vacation overseas in locations where she 
believed its use was either legal or sanctioned by the local authorities. She was not a 
federal contractor, federal employee, or a security clearance holder at the time. Her last 
involvement with marijuana was over two years ago. Since then, Applicant has been 
hired by an employer with a drug-free workplace policy who required her to take and 
pass a pre-employment drug screen. She is dedicated to her job and family, and would 
not put either at risk by being involved with marijuana or other illegal drugs. She 
voluntarily disclosed and freely discussed her past drug involvement during the course 
of the security clearance process. She credibly testified that she would not engage in 
similar behavior in the future. Based upon a complete and thorough review of the record 
evidence and after having the opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor while 
testifying, I find that her past marijuana experimentation is unlikely to be repeated. 
Applicant’s past drug involvement no longer raises a concern about her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her past illegal drug involvement.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s connections to her aunt, uncle, and cousin in 
China raise the foreign influence security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 6:5  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.6 
                                                          
5 The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s connection to her father-in-law and his new wife raises a 
Guideline B concern. In light of Applicant’s admission, I have presumed that such familial connections 
raise a security concern but, as further explained below, find that said concern was mitigated.  
 
6 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added) (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
7 
 
 
 An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have familial or other connections in a foreign country. Instead, in 
assessing an individual’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; its intelligence-gathering history; the 
country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors, not the least of which is the 
nature and strength of an applicant’s connections in a foreign country.7 
 
 Applicant’s connections to her relatives in China are significant and raise serious 
concerns about her susceptibility to adverse foreign influence. Applicant was raised by 
her aunt and uncle and grew up with her cousin. Her connection to these relatives is 
deep and strong. Notwithstanding Applicant’s (understandable) contempt for the PRC 
government, those working on behalf of the PRC could attempt to leverage her relatives 
in China to influence her to disclose sensitive information. Of note, the PRC is known to 
aggressively target the United States for sensitive information and, as it is clear from 
Applicant’s own testimony, the PRC government has no qualms in abusing its own 
people, to include young children, in pursuit of its aims. Thus, Applicant’s connections to 
her family in China raise the foreign influence security concern and establish the 
following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 The foreign influence guideline also sets forth a number of mitigating conditions. I 
have considered all the mitigating conditions, to include: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 14-03112 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015); ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 
2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
8 
 
 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts . . . from a foreign 
country.8 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by her connections to and 
contact with her relatives in China. Applicant’s limited opportunities now-a-days to 
speak more frequently with her relatives do not minimize the deep love and affection 
she has for them or the foreign influence risk posed by such familial ties to China. AG 
¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s deep ties to the United States and her voluntary 
disclosure of her foreign connections during the course of the security clearance 
process. However, this favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate the serious security 
concerns raised by her deep and strong connections to her relatives in China, as 
previously explained. Accordingly, I find that AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(e) partially apply, but are 
insufficient to mitigate the foreign influence security concern.9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I hereby incorporate my Guideline B and H analysis. 
                                                          
8 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns presumably raised by her connections to her father-
in-law and his new wife. She rebutted the legal presumption that she is close to these individuals. Her 
father-in-law’s foreign contacts resulted in no long-lasting business or other relationships raising a 
security concern. Applicant promptly reported the information regarding her father-in-law and his foreign 
contacts, and fully discussed them during her background investigation. AG ¶¶ 8(a) – 8(c), and 8(e) apply 
in full or in part, and mitigate the concerns raised by SOR 2.b – 2.d. 
 
9 At the same time, I note that this finding is “not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism but merely an 
acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be 
important to a loved-one, such as a family member.” ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 
2009). 
 
10 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant presented a strong case in mitigation, to include her honesty and full 
cooperation throughout the security clearance process. However, as the Appeal Board 
recently stated:  
 
[A] “clearance [decision] does not equate with passing judgment upon an 
individual’s character. Instead, it is only an attempt to predict [her] possible 
future behavior and to assess whether, under the compulsion of 
circumstances or for other reasons, [she] might compromise sensitive 
information.” Even a person of the highest character can experience 
circumstances under which [she] could be tempted to place the well-being 
of foreign relatives over the interests of the United States.11  
 
 In light of the administratively noticed facts regarding the PRC, Applicant’s close 
connections to and contact with her relatives in China continue to raise a security 
concern. Consequently, I must resolve those concerns in favor of U.S. national security 
and deny her request for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:          Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b – 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015), quoting and citing, Hill v. Dept. of the Air Force, 
844 F. 2d 1407 at 1409 (10th Cir. 1988). 
