 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-06973 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 28, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 10, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 22, 2015. He answered the 
SOR in writing on July 13, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 7, 2015, and I 
received the case assignment on October 15, 2015. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on October 27, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 20, 2015. 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, which were received without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 3, 2015. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of the 
SOR. He admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.b of the SOR, with explanations. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
Applicant is 64 years old, married, and has two children from his first marriage 
and three stepchildren from his present marriage. They are all adults. Applicant is a 
truck owner and operator for a defense contractor. He operates the truck with his wife 
as a co-driver. He does not have a current security clearance. (Exhibit 5) 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges two delinquent debts, one owed to a credit card 
company for $286, and the second debt a tax owed to the federal Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) for the 2008 tax year for $35,881. The tax lien dates from 2011. He and 
his wife are jointly obligated on this tax debt. (Tr. 16, 29-40; Exhibits 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant claims he paid the credit card debt and it is not on his current credit 
report. The October 2015 credit report does not show this debt as an active account. 
This debt is resolved. (Tr. 17; Exhibits 6-8) 
 
 Applicant testified the tax debt is a debt he owes. He documented he has an 
installment payment agreement with the IRS and pays $500 each month since 2011. 
The balance now owed is about $9,600 according to his testimony and his Answer. He 
also disclosed the debt on his e-QIP. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 16-40; Exhibits B, 
C, 5-8) 
 
Applicant submitted a letter dated November 15, 2015, from the vice-president of 
the trucking company that employs Applicant. He stated Applicant has worked for his 
company since 2003. Applicant and his wife are rated as very professional drivers, 
making all appointments on time, and in full compliance with all federal, state, and 
Department of Defense rules and regulations while working. (Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $35,881 in delinquent tax debt for tax year 2008 that 
apparently remained unpaid. His other debt was a credit card for $286. Applicant has 
two delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant paid the credit card debt some time ago. It is no longer on his credit 
record. The debt was of a small amount and incurred some time ago. It is now resolved 
and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The tax debt is being resolved by an installment payment agreement that 
Applicant follows regularly. AG ¶ 20 (a) is established.  
 
There is clear evidence that the two delinquent debts listed in Applicant’s SOR 
are paid or being paid on the monthly basis. The financial problem is being resolved and 
is under control. AG ¶ 20 (c) is established. 
 
Applicant has paid or is paying on the installment basis the two debts alleged in 
the SOR. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay his 
delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant resolved his two debts in 
an orderly manner. He paid the credit card debt and is paying the tax debt. At the rate 
that debt is being paid, $500 monthly plus the application of any income tax refunds, it 
should be totally resolved in 2016. Now less than $5,000 is owed. There is no potential 
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. It is highly unlikely that the issue will be 
repeated. The current tax debt occurred six years ago and there has not been any 
repetition of that type of debt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
6 
 
 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
