 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04881 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For: Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline K, handling protected 
information, Guideline M, use of information technology systems, and Guideline E 
personal conduct security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K, Guideline 
M, and Guideline E. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on April 1, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
5, 2015, with a hearing date of October 20, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant offered no documents 
at the hearing, but the record was kept open and he offered exhibit (AE) A in a timely 
post-hearing submission, which was admitted with no objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Ans., he admitted all the allegations, with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He is married and has one child. He has worked for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, since 2010. He is a systems administrator. He 
has held a secret clearance since 2004. He has a master’s degree.1   
  
 The allegations against Applicant include failing to comply with closed area 
procedure by placing a file directory of a higher classification on a lower level disk drive 
in January 2013, resulting in a security infraction; improperly downloading material while 
completing a work task in a lab environment in March 2013, resulting in a security 
violation; and failing to comply with closed area procedures by disclosing unclassified 
program information that required enhanced protection procedures by using an 
unsecured telephone in March 2013, resulting in a security infraction. These incidents 
were cross-alleged under Guidelines K, M, and E.  
  
 In January 2013, Applicant was tasked to perform duties that he had not done 
before. He was responsible for visually verifying thousands of lines of script and missed 
a classified item that should not have been there. That same classified item was also 
missed by a security engineering team as well. There was no compromise, since the 
people who noticed the classified script were cleared personnel. Applicant was given a 
verbal counseling by his supervisor for this incident (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant 
acknowledged his mistake and talked to his supervisor about how to accomplish the 
task correctly. He was removed from this tasking and has not performed it since the 
incident. Additionally, the verification process has been changed and improved because 
of the incident.2  
 
 In March 2013, Applicant was performing another duty, which was part of the 
same tasking that resulted in his January 2013 infraction. In this subtask, he was to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 21-22, 31; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 22-24, 26, 28, 38-39; Ans., GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
transfer media from a backup storage drive to a boot drive using new equipment that 
was not covered by existing procedures. Procedures existed for how such a transfer 
was to take place using different equipment. However, new procedures were being 
written, but were not completed at this time. Because the transfer that Applicant was 
tasked to complete was time sensitive, he was directed to proceed even though the new 
transfer procedures were not finalized. The old procedures failed to address the type of 
transfer he was about to complete. With this ambiguity, he now realizes he should have 
stopped the transfer and sought guidance from his security team. He was cited for a 
security violation (SOR ¶ 1.b). After the transfer, the lab discs were examined and no 
compromise took place. Applicant talked to senior members of the team about how to 
accomplish future transfers properly. He accepted responsibility for his actions and has 
learned from this mistake. He no longer performs this task.3  
 
 Later in March 2013, when the incident stated in SOR ¶ 1.b was under 
investigation by the company’s security division, Applicant was contacted by telephone 
by a security representative and asked questions about the incident. During the call, 
Applicant revealed some unclassified program information that required enhanced 
protection procedures and which was not to be revealed over an open telephone line. 
Applicant admitted his mistake in disclosing this information. He explained that he was 
nervous and upset about the investigation. His disclosure was inadvertent and he 
immediately got off the phone and went to the security office to finish the conversation. 
He received a verbal warning for this incident (SOR ¶ 1.c). He has taken corrective 
measures to insure that he will not disclose sensitive information over the telephone. He 
has not had another security incident since March 2013.4  
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor testified that he was fully aware of the three 
security incidents that form the SOR. He has supervised Applicant since 2010. He 
described Applicant as a hard working model employee with great integrity. He believes 
Applicant’s actions were inadvertent. He can see how the incidents could have 
happened to anyone in Applicant’s position. He provided an example by stating that the 
person who succeeded Applicant with the tasks also made similar mistakes. He was 
upset when he heard the circumstance concerning the SOR ¶ 1.c allegation (telephone 
disclosure) because he believed that the security division should not have put Applicant 
in the position of discussing the investigation over the telephone in the first place. He 
believes they were wrong to do so. He continues to support Applicant for a security 
clearance. He believes Applicant made honest mistakes and has learned from them.5  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 25; Ans., GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 121-122; Ans., GE 4; AE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 53-64. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all the handling protected information disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 34 and determined the following apply: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment;  
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant failed to comply with proper procedures as outlined in the SOR 
allegations. AG ¶¶ 34(a), 34(c), and 34(g) apply, but because there was no evidence of 
counseling by management before the incidents, AG ¶ 34(h) does not apply. 
 
 All the mitigating conditions for handling protected information under AG ¶ 35 
were considered and the following were found relevant under these circumstances: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and  
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since they occurred in January and 
March 2013 and resulted from the same general tasking to him. He has not experienced 
another security issue since that time. On the contrary, he has been recognized by his 
supervisor as acknowledging his mistakes and learning from them. He provided 
persuasive evidence to show that sufficient time has passed since the incidents, that 
any security issues are unlikely to recur, and that his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment are not in doubt. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply. 
 
 Applicant made a credible case that there was ambiguity concerning his 
responsibilities to properly perform the tasks which resulted in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b 
allegations. AG ¶ 35(c) applies. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially relevant: 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; and 
(g) negligence or lax security habits in handling information technology 
that persist despite counseling by management. 
 
 The analysis above for the Guideline K allegations also applies under Guideline 
M. AG ¶ 40(d) applies, but because there was no evidence of counseling by 
management before the incidents, AG ¶ 40(g) does not apply. 
 
7 
 
 
I also have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41, and I 
considered the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since they occurred between 
January and March 2013 and were all related to the same tasking. He has not 
experienced another security issue concerning information systems security since that 
time. On the contrary, his supervisor vouched for his trustworthiness and expressed his 
satisfaction that Applicant learned from this incident and will not let it happen again. He 
provided persuasive evidence to show that sufficient time has passed since the 
incidents, that any security issues are unlikely to recur, and that his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment are not in doubt. AG ¶ 41(a) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
Between January and March 2013, Applicant failed to comply with proper 
procedure, which resulted in three security incidents. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as relevant: 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 Applicant sought advice from management on how to deal with similar situations 
in the future and is dedicated to not making the same mistakes again. Other people 
have made similar mistake and as a result security procedures have been changed. His 
own security people set him up for failure by asking him questions concerning the 
investigation over the telephone. His direct supervisor is convinced that Applicant 
learned from this experience and vouches for his trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
reliability. Similar incidents are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17 (c) and 17(d) apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s last 
security incident occurred in 2013 without recurrence. I considered the lack of training 
that he received, the mission requirements he was subject to, and the confusion over 
the proper procedures to follow. I also considered that he admitted his mistakes and 
showed initiative in seeking improvement. All of which demonstrate his permanent 
behavior changes toward security issues and the unlikeliest chance of recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant met his burden and provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline K, Guideline 
M, and Guideline E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph   3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
