                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 14-06347
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
 
History of the Case
On March 25, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 10, 2015, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 21, 2015, and did not respond  to the FORM
The case was assigned to me on November 10, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated two debts exceeding
$39,000. Allegedly, each of the listed delinquent debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, he did not dispute any of the listed debts, and he
provided explanations. He claimed the student loan debt covered in subparagraph 1.a
became delinquent when his son could not find a job after 2008 graduation and
Applicant could not help him due to his own layoff. He claimed he is back to paying the
student loan debt and has reduced the $46,000 accrued balance to $35,300, as of April
2015, is current in his payments, and is pledged to pay the student debt in full.
Addressing the creditor 1.b lease debt, Applicant claimed he moved out of his
apartment with a proper 30-day notice before his lease expired. He claimed he vacated
the apartment with the unit in good condition. He claimed his landlord later billed him for
$1,337, even though he vacated the apartment before his lease expired without any
rent demands. Applicant claimed he challenged the landlord’s billing and provided
documentation from the landlord confirming only $212 was still owing, as of February
2008. And he claimed he is trying to negotiate a settlement with the landlord.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 56-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in May 2010 and has one child (age unclear) from this
marriage. (Item 3) He attended vocational classes in 1981 and earned an (ET) diploma
in February 1981. (Item 3) He claimed no military service.
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2014. Between
October 2012 and March 2014, he was unemployed. After working for his previous
employer for over four years between June 2008 and October 2012, he was laid off.
(Item 3) Previously, he worked for other employers. He experienced unemployment as
well between February 2006 and June 2008. (Items 3 and 5)
Finances
In 2004, Applicant co-signed for student loans with creditor 1.a to fund his son’s
education in the approximate amount of $32,000. (Item 3) These accounts became
3
delinquent in 2009 because (a) Applicant’s son could not find a job after graduating
from college in 2008 and (b) Applicant could not afford the monthly loan payments by
himself. (Items 3 and 5) By 2012, the delinquency balance on the loans had grown to
$46,220, in part due to the added transfer fees by succeeding lenders. (Items 3 and 5)
In 2014, Applicant arranged for an installment agreement with the lender that
called for minimum monthly payments of $334. His bank statements attached to his
answer reflect regular $334 monthly payments between May 2014 and April 2015.
(Items 2 and 5) He pledged to continue making his minimum monthly payments
required to maintain the accounts in current status. (Items 2 and 5)
Applicant also incurred an alleged deficiency balance on a lease he vacated in
February 2008 following a layoff. In his interview with an agent of the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) in June 2014, he assured that he paid half of the last
month’s rent with the landlord’s approval before vacating the apartment. (Item 5) 
Sgurprised to later get a bill from creditor 1.b for $2,780, he has maintained a
long-running dispute with the creditor over the last billed amount. His documented letter
from his landlord in February 2008 confirmed a last payment of $1,442 in February
2008 and a current balance due of $212 to cover various apartment fees assessed by
the landlord. (Item 2) Applicant continues to dispute creditor 1.b’s $2,780 claimed lease
debt that is reported in Applicant’s credit reports as an outstanding debt. (Items 2, 4 and
5)  
Applicant attributed his debt delinquencies to periods of unemployment in 2008,
and between October 2012 and March 2014. (Items 2-3 and 5) He considers his current
financial condition to be much improved. (Items 2 and 5)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
4
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
5
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Executive Order 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed electronics technician implementation manager
for a defense contractor who accumulated two debts that have been reported to be in
delinquent status: one accepted and exceeding $36,000 and another disputed in the
alleged amount of $2,780. His son’s student loan debt fell into delinquent status in
2009 when his son could not find work and Applicant himself was in layoff status.
Applicant has since resumed payments on his son’s student loan accounts. These
accounts have been returned to current status with the benefit of an installment
agreement and documented regular monthly payments between May 2014 and April
2015. 
The other listed SOR debt is a disputed payment demand from creditor 1.b that
Applicant claims was previously settled in February 2008. He documented the basis
of his dispute with a lease billing agreement that Applicant documented with a
February 2008 letter from the landlord confirming receipt of a $1,442 payment and a
residual balance owing for miscellaneous fees totaling $212. Subsequently, the
landlord billed Applicant for the entire last month of the lease (i.e., $2,780), which
Applicant rejected and has continued to dispute the billing with the hopes of settling
the account with the landlord.
Applicant’s accumulation of two delinquent debts warrant initially the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations,”  apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his two listed debts covered in
the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his credit
reports. To date, he is current with his son’s student loan accounts and has
established a good-fath dispute with the apartment landlord who claims money owing
from Applicant’s last month of his lease. Applicant documented in his pleading
6
submissions that he acted responsibly to resolve his two listed debts. See ISCR Case
03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Inferentially, Applicant’s delinquent student loan debts are attributable for the
most part to income shortages following his layoff in 2008. Based on the documented
materials in the FORM, extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s
inability to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” 
While the specifics of Applicant’s dispute with his landlord are not detailed, the
2008 letter from his landlord that he attached to his answer is persuasive proof that
any money allegedly owed to the landlord is not $2,780, but no more than $212 for
assorted landlord fees at the most. Applicant meets his burden of establishing a good-
faith dispute and may take advantage of  MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of two alleged delinquent debts. Resolution of
his listed delinquent student loan accounts and credit to his demonstrating a good-
faith dispute of the debt alleged by his landlord reflect positive on his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the amount of
information available for consideration in this record enables him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to meet minimum clearance eligibility criteria.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s efforts to reduce his student loan balances (i.e., from $46,000 to under
$36,000) and resolve a 2008 landlord debt, favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
7
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:                           For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
