 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-03997   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s removal from a federal 
contractor position in January 2011 does not reflect negatively on his current security 
worthiness. Furthermore, he did not provide false or misleading information on his 
security clearance application about the circumstances of his removal. Clearance is 
granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On July 22, 2015, I 
issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  The parties 
complied with the terms of the order.3 At the hearing convened on August 13, 2015, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through R, without objection. In addition to his exhibits, I asked Applicant to prepare a 
demonstrative exhibit identifying the individuals likely to be discussed during the 
hearing.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified section 13C: 
Employment Record on his November 2012 security clearance application by failing to 
disclose that he left a positon in January 2011 under unfavorable circumstances. 
However, this employment does not fall within the scope of the question, which is 
limited to employment activities not previously listed in section 13A: Employment 
Activities. Applicant disclosed the details of the employment under Section 13A, so he 
did not need to disclose it again under Section 13C. Accordingly, the SOR ¶ 1.c is 
decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 53, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
May 2012. The issues in the SOR involve the circumstances surrounding the 
termination of his employment by a former employer, a federal contractor, in January 
2011.5  
 
 From September 2009 to September 2010, Applicant served as an unpaid fellow 
for another government agency (agency), specializing in social media analysis for East 
Asia. After completing the fellowship, Applicant transitioned into a contract analyst 
position and was assigned to a team at the agency supervised by a federal employee. 
Under this arrangement, Applicant’s supervisor did not have the authority to discipline, 
reprimand, institute a performance plan for Applicant, or terminate him. That authority 
lay with the contract’s program manager, an employee of the same company as 
Applicant, who handled the human resources issues related to contractor employees. 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 The demonstrative exhibit is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s supervisor could only make recommendations to the program manager 
about the resolution of any performance or disciplinary issues.6  
 
 In his contract position, Applicant was tasked with monitoring, analyzing, and 
disseminating information about the East Asian blogosphere. His duties often required 
him to translate foreign-language social media posts into English. Applicant, who 
disseminated his work throughout the agency and to agency staff worldwide, believed 
that his work was well received by his audience. Applicant also believed that he 
developed a good rapport and working relationships with executive-level employees in 
the agency. In January 2011, Applicant’s supervisor requested that the program 
manager remove Applicant from the contract. Applicant’s supervisor believed that 
Applicant was trying to sabotage his team. He also considered Applicant’s effort at 
building relationships with executive-level agency employees inappropriate. In time, he 
came to think of Applicant as being untrustworthy.7  
 
Days earlier, Applicant sent an e-mail to several people, including the assistant 
secretary of the agency implying that another team member, a longtime federal 
employee originally from East Asia, was operating under an improper foreign influence. 
Applicant felt so strongly about the perceived foreign influence that he attempted to file 
a report with the agency’s security office. Applicant’s supervisor viewed this allegation 
as unfounded, offensive, and malicious. In support of his request for Applicant’s 
removal, Applicant’s supervisor forwarded the program manager five examples of e-
mails written and sent by Applicant between July 2010 and January 2011 to various 
high-level agency employees that Applicant’s supervisor believed showed Applicant’s 
poor judgment.  In his email, Applicant’s supervisor told the program manager that he 
spoke with Applicant on each occasion about the inappropriate nature of his actions, but 
it does not appear that Applicant’s supervisor documented any of these issues before 
making the removal request in January 2011. Applicant acknowledged that these 
conversations occurred, but he did not see them as reprimands or admonishments 
about his work, behavior, or judgment, but as the normal discourse that occurs during 
the editorial process as the two discussed translations and content. The program 
manager agreed to remove Applicant from the team, but did not inform Applicant of this 
decision.8  
 
  After Applicant reported to work the following day, his supervisor ordered him to 
pack up his personal belongings. Agency security came to his work area to confiscate 
Applicant’s building access badge and escort him out of the building. Shocked, 
Applicant asked his supervisor if his chain of command at the agency was aware of 
Applicant’s removal. Applicant’s supervisor confirmed that the decision had been 
properly vetted.  Once outside the building, Applicant called his program manager and 
his supervisor’s boss. Both acknowledged that they were aware of his impending 
removal. Later, the program manager explained to him that the agency exercised an “at-
                                                          
6 Tr. 28. 
 
7 Tr. 26, 95-96;  GE 1; AE D-E, G-H. 
 
8 Tr. 24-26, 46-48, 62-66, 116, 130-143; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
will” clause to request his removal from the contract, meaning the agency could request 
Applicant’s removal from the contract at any time for any reason without having to 
establish cause for termination or providing any advance warning.  Applicant had never 
been disciplined for any rule or security violations by the agency or his employer. The 
program manager assured Applicant that he remained in good standing with the 
company and that they would try to place him on another contract. However, less than 
two weeks later, the company terminated Applicant’s employment because they did not 
have another position for him.9  
 
 Six months later, Applicant reached out to a former coworker at the agency. The 
coworker, a federal employee, informed Applicant that the team he used to work on was 
dismantled, his former supervisor was reassigned, and that contractors were being let 
go as part of a large restructuring effort within the agency. Based on this conversation, 
Applicant assumed that his removal was prompted by the restructuring.10  
 
 Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in November 
2012. In Section 13A: Your Employment Activities, Applicant disclosed his employment 
with the agency from September 2009 to September 2010 as an unpaid fellow and 
October 2010 to January 2011 as a contractor and answered the corresponding follow-
up questions. He cited an agency restructuring that resulted in the termination of several 
contractor positions as the reason he left the contract position in January 2011. The 
final question related to this particular employment activity asks,  
 
“For this employment have any of the following happened to you in the last 
seven years:  fired; quit after being told you would be fired; left by mutual 
agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct; [or] left by 
mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance? 
 
Applicant responded, “no.”11 
 
 In January 2013, a background investigator interviewed Applicant about this 
employment, and Applicant reiterated that he left the position because of the agency 
restructuring.12 Shortly after the interview, the background investigator contacted the 
Applicant’s former supervisor at the agency, who followed up their conversation with an 
e-mail stating: 
 
I’m attaching all the emails I sent to [Applicant’s employer] detailing the 
reasons I fired [Applicant] in January 2011. I’ve also attached a message 
from my boss . . . informing our principal deputy coordinator (the #2 
                                                          
9 Tr. 26-29, 65, 116-118, 120-125, 145-146, 162-166; AE K. 
 
10 Tr. 127-130, 146-148.  
 
11 GE 1.  
 
12 GE 2.  
 
5 
 
person in the bureau) that we planned to terminate [Applicant’s] contract 
and a message from [a team member] explaining what [Applicant] did.13 
 
Applicant’s former supervisor testified at the hearing as a witness for the 
Government. He acknowledged that there was a majoring restructuring in the agency 
after Applicant was removed from his position. However, Applicant’s supervisor 
explained that the restructuring was not a consideration in the decision to remove 
Applicant from the contract. In discussing the email he sent to the background 
investigator, Applicant’s supervisor admitted that he used the word “fired” colloquially. 
He also acknowledged that he did not have the authority to fire Applicant, only to 
request his removal from the contract and that he had no say in whether the company 
kept Applicant as an employee after the removal from the contract.14 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
13 GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. 26-31, 40-42, 57-58, 67-70.  
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.15 The SOR ¶ 1.a 
alleges that Applicant “was terminated for cause from [his] assignment as a contractor 
with the [another agency].” This allegation is inaccurate. Applicant was removed from 
his contractor position at the request of the client agency. He was not terminated by his 
employer as a result of this request. Applicant was let go by his employer, in good 
standing, because the company did not have another position for Applicant. However, 
the pleadings in these adjudications are not held to a standard of perfection. All that is 
required is that the allegation put the Applicant on notice of the subject matter of 
security concern.16 The overall gist of the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a is that Applicant was 
removed from his contactor position for exhibiting conduct that raises security concerns.  
 
Typically, disruptive or inappropriate behavior in the work place is disqualifying 
when it supports a negative whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.17  Here, Applicant’s supervisor believed that Applicant 
displayed a lack of judgment in the content and distribution of the e-mails he sent in the 
course of executing his duties as a social media analyst and that Applicant made 
serious and baseless accusations against another federal employee. The instances of 
poor judgment cited by Applicant’s supervisor involve differences between the two men 
about the execution of the team’s objectives, not behavior that can be objectively 
classified as disruptive, a breach, malfeasance, or other inappropriate conduct by 
Applicant. Furthermore, Applicant’s actions, as described by his former supervisor, are 
not indicative of an inability to properly handle or handle safeguard information. 
 
A favorable finding for Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.a does not resolve the falsification 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose on his November 
2012 security clearance that he left his contractor position with the agency under 
unfavorable circumstances. The information available to the Government before the 
hearing provided a good-faith basis for the allegation. Specifically, GE 3, an e-mail from 
Applicant’s former supervisor to the background investigator indicated that Applicant 
had been fired from his contractor position. The e-mail also suggested that Applicant 
engaged in some kind of misconduct. At hearing, the Government’s evidence revealed 
that Applicant did not leave his contract position at the agency on his own accord. He 
was approached by agency security in front of his co-workers, relieved of his building 
badge, and escorted out of the building. These events were undoubtedly shocking and 
                                                          
15  See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 01-26479 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 16, 2003). 
 
17  See  AG ¶ 16(d). 
 
 
7 
 
embarrassing for Applicant. Considered in isolation, these facts support a finding that 
Applicant left the position under unfavorable circumstances. 
 
However, this type of piecemeal analysis is inappropriate. Taking such an 
approach to the evidence has the potential to result in findings that do not reflect a 
reasonable, plausible interpretation of the record.18 As unpleasant as being escorted out 
of the agency may have been, this event alone was not enough for Applicant to 
conclude that the reason for his removal was related to his performance or some kind of 
misconduct. Applicant was not given any explanation for his removal that suggested 
such. Unable to obtain a clear answer from the agency or his employer, Applicant 
assumed that he lost his position because of the agency restructuring plan. Although 
Applicant’s assumption was incorrect, it was not unreasonable. Accordingly, it was not 
unreasonable for Applicant to report on his security clearance application that he did not 
leave the position under unfavorable circumstances. He did not act with any intention to 
provide false or misleading information to the Government. It is also worth noting that 
any question regarding Applicant’s removal from his contract position arose only after 
Applicant’s former supervisor inaccurately used the word “fired” to describe it. 
Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.b is also found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Based on a careful consideration of the record, I find that Applicant did not 
engage in conduct that is disqualifying under the personal conduct guideline. I have also 
considered the alleged conduct under the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2 and have 
determined that a negative assessment is not warranted. It is clear from the record that 
despite his qualifications, Applicant was not a good fit for his contractor position at the 
agency. His former supervisor believed that Applicant was trying to sabotage his team 
and tarnish the reputation of an agency employee that the supervisor held in high 
regard. Applicant believed that a member of his team was operating under an improper 
foreign influence. This disparate view of the work environment led to a personnel issue 
for Applicant’s supervisor, which he remedied by having Applicant removed from the 
contract. The incident does not reflect negatively on Applicant’s ability to properly 
handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
18 See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 02-05988 (App. Bd. December 18, 2003); ISCR Case No. 99-0005 (App. Bd. 
April 19, 2000).  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
