 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06043 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. He does not have a current financial problem and his finances are under 
control. He mitigated the Guideline F security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 17, 2014, 
seeking to retain a clearance required for his job. On December 30, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2015, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 13, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated August 6, 2015. He acknowledged 
receipt of the FORM on August 18, 2015. Applicant was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in rebuttal, extenuation, and mitigation. 
As of October 23, 2015, Applicant had not responded to the FORM or submitted any 
information. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to 
me on December 1, 2015. 
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Department Counsel's submission included a summary of a personal subject 
interview on May 5, 2014. (Item 5) The summary was not authenticated as required by 
the Directive E3.1.20. Department Counsel's submission included a footnote advising 
Applicant that Item 5 was not authenticated and that failure to object to Item 5 might 
constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. However, a pro se applicant's failure to 
object to an unauthenticated personal subject interview is not tantamount to waiver of 
the authentication requirement. Waiver means "[t]he voluntary relinquishment or 
abandonment - express or implied - of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to 
have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and the 
intention of forgoing it." Black's Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., 
West 2009). The record does not reflect that Applicant understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not reflect that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of Item 5. Thus, Item 5 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.d, because 
Applicant was an authorized user of this account, and in his opinion, Applicant was not 
liable for this debt. I granted the motion as requested. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. However, he noted 
that SOR ¶ 1.c was a duplicate of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old engineering support technician employed by a federal 
contractor. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1980 until 1995, when he 
was honorably retired. He married his first spouse in 1989 and divorced in 2001. He 
married his spouse in 2002. He has four children, ages 3, 11, 16, and 23.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was first granted access to classified information at the secret level 
during his Navy service in 1980. The DOD continued his eligibility for a secret clearance 
in 2003, when Applicant worked for a federal contractor. Apparently, Applicant has 
continuously possessed a security clearance since then.  
 
Applicant’s 2014 SCA indicates that he worked for a federal contractor from 2003 
to 2006. In January 2006 he was laid off because of a decrease in work and remained 
unemployed until May 2006. From May 2006 to June 2007, he worked for a private 
company. Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
June 2007.  
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial record) of the 2014 SCA that he had 
financial problems that included a lien filed against his home for a delinquent credit card 
account. He explained that in 2007, he purchased a house and renovated it with the 
intent to make it his permanent residence. His plan was to move into the renovated 
home, and then sell his current home to pay off the debts incurred in the renovation. 
Before he moved in, the house was burned to the ground and he lost his investment in 
the property. The insurance refused to pay the claim. Applicant retained an attorney and 
filed suit to recover the insurance money. After five years of litigation, the settlement he 
received was insufficient to repay the creditors (for the renovation expenses) and his 
attorney. 
 
Applicant admitted that he used the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b (credit card), 
1.c (retail warehouse credit account), and 1.d (credit card) to renovate the house that 
burned down. A review of the credit reports (FORM, Items 2, 4, and 6) and a letter from 
an attorney, dated January 29, 2015 (stating Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a), 
leads me to conclude that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was sold to the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.c will be consolidated with SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Applicant claimed that he tried numerous times to resolve his delinquent debts, 
but was unsuccessful. Apparently, he considered refinancing his current home or selling 
it to resolve his delinquent debts. He also stated other circumstances that prevented 
him from addressing his delinquent debts, such as: a cardiac illness that put him in the 
hospital for some periods, the birth of his youngest child, his wife’s developing a chronic 
illness after the birth of the child, and her breaking an ankle recently and requiring 
extensive surgery. He implied that his earnings were insufficient to pay his living 
expenses and the delinquent debts. Notwithstanding his claims, Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence of any efforts taken to resolve these debts since he acquired 
them, until he was served with the SOR. 
 
Applicant noted that he served on active duty 15 years and honorably retired 
from the Navy. After his retirement, he continued to work government-related jobs that 
required his eligibility for a clearance. He has held a clearance during the last 30 years 
without any security issues or concerns. There is no evidence to show that Applicant 
has ever compromised his security clearance or had any security issues, except for the 
current SOR allegations. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c (consolidated), Applicant presented 
documentary evidence showing that he settled and paid the account in full.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($817) concerns a delinquent credit card account that was opened in 
2006, and has been delinquent since 2008. According to the 2014 and 2015 credit 
reports (FORM, Items 4 and 6), Applicant was an authorized user of this account. The 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d ($5,553) was withdrawn by the Government because Applicant 
was an authorized user of the account and not liable for the debt.  
 
Applicant provided little information about his financial situation. He did not 
provide any information about his and his wife’s income, monthly expenses, and 
whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day living expenses 
and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in financial 
counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
Nevertheless, the FORM credit reports show numerous accounts in good 
standing and several accounts paid after being delinquent or charged off. I note that 
Item 6 shows SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d as having “$0 balance and $0 past due.” Likely, 
because he was an authorized user of the accounts and not liable for the debts, or the 
accounts are more than seven years old and were removed under the Fair Credit Act. It 
appears that Applicant never was legally responsible for either account. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG lists disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
Applicant had one account delinquent since 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It raises the 
applicability of two financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply and mitigate the financial security concerns. 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from the burning of the house he purchased and 
renovated in 2007. Also, the insurer refused to pay the claim over the course of five 
years until Applicant was forced to file a suit to recover the insurance money. 
Additionally, Applicant and his wife had health problems that prevented him from 
addressing his delinquent accounts in a timely manner. 
 
Applicant provided little information about his current financial situation. 
Nevertheless, the credit reports show that he does not have a current financial problem, 
and that he seems to be living within his financial means.  
 
On balance, and considering Applicant’s honorable service and years possessing 
a security clearance with no security issues, I find that Applicant presented sufficient 
information to establish that his financial problem is under control. Applicant’s answer to 
the SOR shows that he understands the importance of him being financially responsible 
to be eligible for a clearance and to retain his employment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence show that he has a track record of financial responsibility, 
that he currently does not have a financial problem, and his finances are under control. 
He mitigated the Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d :     Withdrawn 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
