                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 14-01269
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding foreign preference. Security concerns about
foreign influence were mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 
History of the Case
On May 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 18, 2014, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on August 31, 2015, and responded to the FORM  within the
time permitted with a cover letter and a copy of a renewed U.S. passport issued in May
2009. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as Items 7 and 8. The case was assigned
to me on November 10, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has (a) a mother who is a citizen of
France; (b) a father who is a dual citizen of France and the United States; (c) a wife
who is a citizen of France residing in Belgium; (d) a son who is a citizen of France,
residing in Belgium; (e) a daughter who is a dual citizen of France and the United
States, residing in Belgium; (f) parents-in-law who are citizens and residents of France;
and (g) extended family members that are citizens and residents of France. These
foreign relationships allegedly create security concerns when applied in connection with
Guideline C foreign preference concerns.
Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly (a) possesses a French identity card (a
Carte Nationale d’Identite) that he has used for travel throughout Europe and (b) has
voted in French elections since turning the age of 18. These allegations allegedly reflect
foreign preference for France.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the foreign influence and
foreign preference allegations with explanations. He claimed he was born in France to a
father who is a dual citizen of the United States and France and to a French mother. He
claimed he married a French citizen in 2005 and was still granted a U.S. security
clearance. He claimed that neither France nor Belgium is known to target U.S. citizens
to obtain protected information or are associated with any risk of terrorism. He claimed
he uses the French identity card for practical purposes when traveling throughout
Europe, which European Union (EU) citizens are permitted to do. And he claimed that
voting in French elections is a right he has as a French citizen, just as he has the right
to vote in U.S. elections.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 34-year senior linguist for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
Applicant, who was born in France and spent most of his growth years in France,
married his spouse (a French citizen) in 2005 and has two children from this marriage:
a son who is a French citizen by birth, residing in Belgium and a daughter who is dual
citizen of France and the United States, residing in Belgium. (Item 3) His daughter is a
nurse by training, who works in Belgium and has no affiliations or connections with any
3
foreign government, military, or intelligence service. (Item 5) Applicant acquired French
citizenship through his parents and dual citizenship with the United states through his
father, who holds dual citizenship with France and the United States. (Items 3-5)
Applicant attended college classes in France between September 1998 and
June 2000 and earned an associate’s degree. (Item 3) Between September 2000 and
August 2001, he attended classes in Spain and earned a bachelor’s degree. He earned
a master’s degree in July 2004 from a French university. (Item 3) 
Since October 2009, Applicant has been employed as a full-time French-English
staff interpreter for NATO in Belgium. (Item 3) As an interpreter, he has worked in
multiple meetings of many types, both inside and outside the United States. Previous to
his work with NATO, he was self-employed as an interpreter in the United states (i.e.,
between August 2006 and September 2009). All of his previous employments and
student activities between January 1997 and July 2006 were centered in France and
other EU member countries. Citizens of these countries (France included) are permitted
to travel freely within EU countries with only a country identity card. (Item 1)  
Applicant received his first U.S. passport in May 1999. (Item 6) He renewed it in
May 2009. (Item 8) Months later in September 2009, he left the United States to accept
an interpreter’s position with NATO. (Items 3-5) In 2007, he applied for and received a
U.S. security clearance. (Items 3-6)
Applicant claims no military service, either in the United States or France. (Items
2-6)  As a French citizen, he has voted in multiple French elections since turning 18
years of age in 1998. (Item 3)  While he claims to have voted in U.S. elections (Item 7),
he provided no documented evidence of doing so. Without corroborating evidence of
his voting in U.S. elections, no favorable inferences of his voting in U.S. elections can
be drawn. 
Applicant possesses no French passport, but does have a French identity card
(characterized in France as a Carte Nationale d’ Identite) (Items 5 and 6) Exercising his
French citizenship, he has used this identity card on multiple occasions to travel
throughout Europe. (Item 2) When interviewed in October 2007 by a State Department
investigator, he produced his U.S. passport which bore stamps documenting his  travel
abroad to various countries between July 1999 and July 2007. (Item 6) When and
where he used his U.S. passport for foreign travel since 2007 is not known. 
Besides using his French identity card for foreign travel to member countries of
NATO and the EU and voting in French elections, Applicant received direct medical
benefits from France when he resided there and more recent indirect medical benefits
from his wife and children, who have received continuous medical benefits in Belgium
through his wife’s Belgium medical insurance. (Items 5 and 6)
During his interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in November 2013, Applicant stressed that “he specifically tries not to
demonstrate a preference for either the United States or France.” (Item 5) He told this
4
OPM agent that he had no need to renounce his French citizenship. (Item 5) Since his
2013 OPM interview, Applicant has expressed no interest in renouncing his French
citizenship and has taken no reported actions to do so.
Applicant’s mother and in-laws are citizens and residents of France. (Item 3)
Both his father and brother hold dual citizenship with France and the United States and
reside in France. His father derived his U.S. citizenship from his birth in the United
States and his French citizenship from either his parents or French naturalization.
(Items 3 and 6) Applicant maintains regular contact with his parents  and brother. (Items
3 and 5) Besides his immediate family members, Applicant has several extended family
members who are citizens and residents of France. (Item 5) He has no contacts with
any of these family members, to whom he is not bound by affection, common interests,
or obligations. (Item 5)
None of Applicant’s family members residing in France have any known ties to
the French government, military, or intelligence services. (Items 5 and 6) Applicant’s
father is a teacher at a French university and teaches French. His mother is a retired
school teacher who also taught French during her teaching career. (Item 5) His
daughter is a full-time student attending classes in Belgium; while his son is too young
for school or employment. Applicant’s brother is a curator who purchases artifacts for a
local French museum. (Item 5)
Applicant maintains contact with several friends and attested that none of these
friends have any known affiliations with foreign governments, military, or intelligence
services. (Item 5) Applicant’s foreign property interests are very limited: a small
checking account in Belgium and a few other assets. (Item 5) He has no reported
assets in the United States. (Item 5)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
5
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate
preference  for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.  See AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
     
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
         
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
6
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is an interpreter for NATO and has resided in Belgium since he
accepted his interpreter position with NATO in 2009. He is a French citizen by virtue
of his birth in France to parents of French citizenship and a dual citizen of France and
the United States through his father who was born in the United States with dual
French citizenship, and is perforce a dual citizen of France and the United States.
Applicant holds both a renewed U.S. passport and French identity card that permits
expedited country entry and exit in EU  countries, inclusive of Belgium where NATO’s
headquarters is located. 
Trust concerns relate to foreign preference based on Applicant’s exercise of a
French identity card to travel to other European countries within the EU and his
receipt of other bestowed French privileges. Other exercised French privileges include
voting in French elections and receiving free family medical benefits for himself and
his family. 
Foreign Preference 
Preference concerns involving applicants with dual citizenship necessarily
entail allegiance assessments and invite critical considerations of acts indicating a
preference for the interests of the foreign country (France) over the interests of the
United States. The issues, as such, raise concerns over Applicant’s  preference for a
foreign country (France) over the United States. By accepting and using a French
identity card to travel throughout Europe that entitles him and his family to special
7
access privileges when entering and exiting France, he demonstrated some
disposition for a split preference for France and the United States.
Since obtaining a French identity card, Applicant has taken multiple trips to
member NATO countries (inclusive of Belgium where he now resides with his wife and
family). On each of these trips since 2009, he has relied on his French identity card
for entry and exit. He has no French passport and provided no proof of ever using his
U.S. passport for travel in Europe after July 2007. These exercises of travel privileges,
when combined with his receipt of other French benefits, reflect active indicia of
French preference. In post-FORM submissions, he provided a copy of his renewed
U.S. passport with no travel entries.  
Because Applicant elected to obtain and use his French identity card
exclusively for travel throughout Europe, he acquired travel privileges not available to
other U.S. citizens. A major policy reason for requiring U.S. citizens with security
clearances to use their U.S. passports for foreign travel is to facilitate the tracing of
the clearance holder’s whereabouts when on travel. This tracking capability is lost
when the clearance holder uses a foreign passport or identity card to enter and exit a
foreign country. 
In the present case, the Government may apply certain provisions of
disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶ 9, “exercise of any right, privilege or
obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign
citizenship of a family member.  This DC includes, but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such      
           benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in               
           another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(3) has some application to the established facts and
circumstances herein. By obtaining and using his French identity card, which replaces
the need for a foreign visa and passport for travel to Belgium and other European
countries within the European Union, Applicant was able to achieve travel privileges
and conveniences not available to other U.S. citizens. By receiving French medical
benefits for himself and his wife and children, Applicant obtained direct benefits not
8
available to U.S. citizens. DC ¶ 10(a)(7) also applies to Applicant’s situation. Applicant
admits to voting regularly in French elections after reaching the age of 18. While
claiming entitlement to vote in U.S. elections, he provided no evidence of his actually
doing so.
In assessing split-preference cases, the Appeal Board has looked to indicia of
active exercise of dual citizenship. In cases where there is record evidence of a dual-
citizen applicant having substantial property and other benefits in a country that are
not available to non-residents or citizens on the same terms, the Appeal Board has
considered such interests to represent special benefits or privileges that reveal a
preference for that particular country. See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4 (App. Bd.
Dec. 29, 2009); See ISCR Case No. 16098 at 2 (App. Bd.  May 29, 2003). 
Without French citizenship retention, Applicant potentially could be subjected
by the French government to a forced surrender of his identity card and create not
only inconveniences for Applicant (e.g., required visas and passports for travel entry
and exit in other European countries), but potential restrictions on stays in Belgium
where he currently works for NATO. Applicant’s retaining and utilizing his French
citizenship and identity card in these circumstances represents material indicia of a
preference for France that cannot be easily reconciled with the split preference he
claims for the United States.  
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can
be trusted in the future to honor his fiduciary responsibilities to the U.S. Government.
Applicant spent three years (2006-2009) working as a self-employed linguist in the
United States. But, except for this brief three-year period, he has spent most of his
entire life in France, where he has forged strong loyalties and family ties. 
Based on OPM and State Department interviews, Applicant clearly places a
high value on his French citizenship and wants to retain it. While his interests and
choices are understandable, considering his circumstances when he left the United
States for Belgium in 2009 to accept a linguist assignment with NATO, they also
reflect a current and ongoing split preference for France and the United States.  
Whole person precepts are certainly helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s preference concerns herein. The strong trust impressions he has
forged with his supervisors, coworkers, and friends who have worked with him through
the years add support to his claims that he retains loyalty and preference to the
United States.
Overall, though, Applicant is not able to persuade that his current exclusive
preference is for the United States. Because he has made considerable use of French
privileges associated with his retaining his French citizenship and identity card, and
benefitting from other French privileges (such as voting in French elections and
receiving French medical benefits), he manifested a preference for France under the
criteria as established by the Appeal Board. Applicant fails to absolve himself of
foreign preference concerns associated with the presented issue of whether he
retains a preference or split preference for his birth country (France), or the United
9
States through his father’s dual citizenship. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline C.
Foreign Influence
Under Guideline B, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated
or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that
is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
interest.” Although France (a charter NATO member) is sometimes characterized as a
foreign collector, it generally is not considered to present any heightened risk
geopolitically in its relationships with the United States. Because Applicant’s foreign
preference has been raised as an issue of security concern as well, his potential
exposure to foreign influence risks through his close ties to his wife and other family
members who are citizens and residents of France and Belgium are raised as
additional security concerns.  
The Government raises security concerns over risks that Applicant’s wife and
family members, who reside in Belgium and France, respectively, might be subject to
undue foreign influence by French and Belgian government authorities to access
classified information in Applicant’s possession or control. Because Applicant has a
wife and family members who have French citizenship by birth and reside currently in
France and Belgium, respectively, they present potential heightened security risks
covered by disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign
influence. The citizenship and residence status of Applicant’s wife, family members,
and friends in France pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the
risks of undue foreign influence that could potentially impact the privacy interests
subject to Applicant’s control. 
Because neither Applicant’s wife nor his and her family members residing in
France have any identified French government or military service affiliation, little
consideration of DC  ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” or  DC  ¶ 7(d),
“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if
that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion,” is warranted. To be sure, neither Applicant’s wife nor their
immediate and extended family members residing in Belgium and  France,
respectively, have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or
appear to be vulnerable to the same. No more than partial application of these
disqualifying conditions are warranted. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens and
10
residents of foreign countries in general. What is considered to be an acceptable risk
in one foreign country may not be in another. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App.
Bd. March 29, 2002). The AGs take into account the country’s demonstrated
relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether the
particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened
security risk. 
Summarized, the geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter. In the case of France, where Applicant has forged strong
integration into French and Belgium society, his French relationships are entitled to
considerable weight. See ISCR Case No. 03-03974 (App. Bd. April 20, 2006). 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely
the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of
a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the United States,” is available to Applicant. Neither Applicant’s parents, his wife’s
parents, his siblings, nor his extended family members and friends residing in France
pose heightened security risks that could subject them to potential pressures and
influence from French government and military officials. 
Another mitigating condition available to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b): “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” Despite the lack of any significant Applicant links to the United States, his
linguist work with NATO is not likely to yield any potential conflicts.
Whole-person assessment is available also to minimize Applicant’s exposure
to potential conflicts of interests with his NATO linguist work and his wife and family
members. Most importantly, Applicant is not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure,
or influence that either his wife or family members residing in Belgium or France
might be exposed to. So, in Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion, pressure,
or influence being brought to bear on him, or his wife and family members is minimal
and mitigated. Overall, potential security concerns over Applicant's wife and family
members  in Belgium and France are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable
to his familial relationships in Belgium and France. Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in
the context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed
above, I make the following formal findings:
11
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):         FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:          For Applicant
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE):    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs  2.a-2.b:         Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                  
