 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01253 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
November 19, 2015. On December 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided additional documents. His response to the FORM and attached documents are 
admitted as Item 7. Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s Response 
to FORM on December 18, 2015. (Item 8) On December 31, 2015, the FORM was 
forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on January 5, 2016. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 4 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. It is a summary of Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview completed by the investigator conducting his background investigation on 
November 9, 2012. It is unsworn and unauthenticated. DODD 5220.6, Enclosure 3, ¶ 
E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is 
otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-
13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Item 4 is not properly authenticated. 
Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a response to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule because he more than likely was unaware of the rule.  Waiver means 
“the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
While Department Counsel mentions the authentication requirement of ¶ E3.1.20 
of the Directive in Footnote 2 of the FORM without directly citing it, I cannot conclude 
Applicant expressly waived this rule because he did not mention it in his response to the 
FORM. In accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, Item 4 is not 
admissible and will not be considered in this decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since August 2003.  He is a high 
school graduate. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from June 1982 until he was 
honorably retired in July 2003. He is divorced and has several adult children. (Item 3)   
 
On July 9, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts which 
are alleged in the SOR: a $36,945 account that was charged off in August 2009 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 4-5); a $31,710 second mortgage that was charged-off in May 
2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 10, 12); and a $15,166 credit card account 
placed for collection in November 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 6).  
 
In his Response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant explains how his financial 
problems began.  Around 2006, Applicant’s then wife received notice that her pay was 
being reduced. At the same time, Applicant’s overtime hours were reduced. The 
 
3 
 
 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was used by his wife to cover their living expenses. 
Applicant claims he was unaware that this was happening. Between 2008 to 2011, his 
wife underwent surgery. After the surgery, she had plastic surgery to repair some of the 
side effects of the surgery. The credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was used to pay for this 
surgery. (Item 2; Item 7) 
 
Because of financial difficulties, Applicant and his wife attempted to sell their 
home. This occurred during the housing market crash. They sold their home at a short 
sale in May 2010. They were hoping to pay their debts with the proceeds, but ended up 
taking a $35,000 loss. The second mortgage remained outstanding. The debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b is the amount owed on the second mortgage. (Item 2 at 10 - 38) 
 
After the sale of the home, Applicant and his wife separated. Their divorce was 
final on March 17, 2011. (Item 2 at 86)  Applicant’s ex-wife filed for bankruptcy. 
Applicant was required to pay off his ex-wife’s car loan because he was a co-signer on 
the loan. In April 2012, his wages were garnished in order to pay off the car loan. The 
amount was $5,613.82. (Item 2 at 90-98) This debt was not alleged in the SOR, but is 
discussed because Applicant raised it and it is considered as matters of extenuation 
and mitigation.  
 
Applicant also paid $8,000 in back taxes for 2009 and 2010, because of a filing 
error by a tax preparer. He entered into an installment agreement which began in 
October 2012.  Applicant’s income tax refunds were applied to the debt. The debt was 
paid by March 2013. (Item 2 at 99-123) This debt was not alleged in the SOR, but is 
discussed because Applicant raised it and it is considered as matters of extenuation 
and mitigation.  
 
On his 2012 e-QIP application, Applicant mentioned he was paying some of his 
debts through a debt repayment agreement. (Item 3, section 26) He did not provide a 
copy of his debt repayment agreement or proof that he was making payments towards 
the repayment agreement (such as receipts, cancelled checks, etc.) In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant states he paid the fees in his debt repayment agreement, but never 
received any updates when he tried to reach them. The debt repayment firm went 
bankrupt. After he discovered the debt repayment firm went bankrupt, he attempted to 
contact the creditors who were collecting the debts. When he finally reached them, he 
could not afford the payments that the creditors required to settle the debts. (Item 2 at 7) 
 
Applicant decided to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy because he believed he had 
no other choice. He retained an attorney to represent him in the bankruptcy proceeding. 
His first consultation was on August 13, 2015. In December 2015, he paid a retainer fee 
and the fee for filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (Item 2 at 124-144; Item 7 at 3)  
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he paid his attorney his 
retainer fee on December 11, 2015. He anticipates the court process will begin soon. 
He believes he is doing everything in his power to resolve his debts. He attended 
 
4 
 
 
consumer debt counseling. He has set up a budget. He intends to pay $1,800 a month 
during the five year repayment plan. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney provided a letter, dated December 1, 2015, 
verifying that Applicant retained him to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. They hope the 
Court will accept a 100% payment plan. The three debts alleged in the SOR are among 
the 14 debts included in the plan. (Item 7 at 3)  Applicant did not provide a copy of his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing.  
 
Applicant did not provide any character references, performance evaluations, or 
awards that could be considered under the whole-person.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2006.  The SOR alleges approximately 
$52,030 in delinquent credit card debt and a $31,710 charged off second mortgage. The 
total amount of the debt is $83,740. These debts became delinquent in late 2009 or 
2010 and remain unresolved. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); and 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant incurred the delinquent accounts alleged in 
the SOR more than five years ago. The debts were charged off or placed for collection  
in 2009 and 2010.  While Applicant states that he enrolled in a debt repayment program, 
he did not provide a copy of his debt repayment agreement or any proof of payments 
made to the debt repayment company.  Applicant recently decided to resolve his 
delinquent debts by filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. At the close of the record, 
he had not filed for  bankruptcy. It is too soon to conclude that the Chapter 13 plan will 
resolve doubts about Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness considering the lengthy 
amount of time that Applicant has encountered financial problems. It is too soon to 
conclude that he will meet the terms of the Chapter 13 repayment plan.   
  
AG & 20(b) partially applies in that Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in 
part, by a reduction of his wife’s income, the loss of overtime hours, and eventually, 
Applicant’s divorce in 2011. While Applicant claimed he attempted to resolve some of 
his debts through a debt repayment program, he provided no documentation of his debt 
repayment agreement or proof of any payments made towards the debt repayment 
agreement. He recently filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant is given partial credit 
 
7 
 
 
in that he is now attempting to deal with his financial situation after neglecting it for 
several years.  
 
AG & 20(c) partially applies in that Applicant attended financial counseling in 
conjunction with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. However, it is too soon to conclude 
that his financial situation is now under control. At the close of the record, Applicant had 
not filed for bankruptcy and a repayment plan had not been approved by the bankruptcy 
court. A question remains as to whether Applicant will be able to meet the terms of the 
five year repayment plan under Chapter 13.   
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies because although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant 
resolved a tax debt and the balance of his ex-wife’s automobile loan. The balance of the 
automobile loan is given less weight because Applicant’s wages were garnished in 
order to resolve the debt. Applicant is making an effort towards resolving his delinquent 
debts by filing for bankruptcy. However, at the close of the record, the bankruptcy had 
not been filed and a payment plan had not been established. It is too soon to conclude 
that Applicant will be able to follow the terms of the Chapter 13 repayment plan. For this 
reason AG & 20(d) is given less weight.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant 
provided evidence that he intends to file for bankruptcy, the bankruptcy had not been 
filed at the close of the record and no repayment plan was established by the 
bankruptcy court. It is unknown whether Applicant has sufficient income to meet his 
 
8 
 
 
financial obligations including the payments towards the Chapter 13 repayment plan. 
Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant meets the 
terms of his Chapter 13 repayment agreement and establishes a track record of 
resolving his delinquent debts, he may demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment record. I considered his over 21 years of active duty service with the U.S. 
Navy. Applicant’s decision to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy was recent. It is too soon to 
conclude that he will successfully meet the terms of the Chapter 13 repayment plan. In 
the future, he may be able to demonstrate a track record of resolving his financial 
obligations. It is too soon to make this conclusion at this point. The security concerns 
raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
