 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-00039 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Patrick E. Henderson, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 14, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 23, 2015. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On September 25, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s 
written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Items 1 to 5, was provided to the Applicant on September 29, 2015. He was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the file on October 8, 2015.  
 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed that 
would have expired on November 7, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted five items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 3 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on May 14, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his own 
statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In 
light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on November 17, 2015. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegation in Subparagraph 1.a and admitted all other 
allegations. (Items 1, 2)  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is married with two adult children. He obtained a 
high school degree in 1989. Then he served in the U.S. Air Force from 1989 to 1992 
receiving an Under Other Than Honorable Discharge. He was in the Army National 
Guard from 1996 to 2010 when he received an Honorable Discharge. He works for a 
defense contractor. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant owes five financial delinquencies. The first two listed in the SOR are 
student loan debts that are unpaid and total $88,055. The third allegation pertains to a 
mortgage being past due in the amount of $2,662 on a mortgage balance of $97,038. 
The fourth debt for $35 owed to a collector for a telephone company. The fifth and final 
debt is owed to the same collector for a cable television debt in the amount of $295. The 
earliest date of delinquency on the credit reports is August 2013. Others occurred in 
2014 and 2015. (Items 1, 4, 5)  
 
 Applicant’s Response states the two education loans are really only one loan 
taken out for his wife’s education. The credit reports of August 8, 2014, and July 8, 
2015, shows two separate education loans with different initiation dates and account 
numbers. He stated his wife obtained an Associate’s degree in 2009 but could not find a 
job in her field of education. While she was unemployed they could not pay all their 
debts. In April 2015, she did find employment and is earning money. He claims they can 
now pay their debts. Then Applicant states his employer eliminated his job when it lost 
the contract at the worksite and his last day of employment there was September 11, 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
2015. There is no information in the FORM about Applicant obtaining unemployment 
compensation after he was laid off by his employer. Now he has other employment and 
moved to another state. (Response; Items 4 and 5) 
 
 Applicant obtained credit counseling in July 2015 from a company approved by 
the government for persons who want to file bankruptcy. He attached a copy of the 
certificate of debtor education from that counseling. Applicant and his wife consulted 
with an attorney about filing bankruptcy. On August 31, 2015, they filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant stated he expected to be granted a bankruptcy discharge 
sometime after December 7, 2015. His bankruptcy petition shows assets of 
$132,724.10 and debts of $176,023.92. Applicant listed the same debts as are listed in 
the SOR except only one of the education loans for $47,040. (Response) 
 
     Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2013 to the present, Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts, totaling 
$91,047, that remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant did not explain why he could not 
have paid a $35 and $295 debt as listed in the SOR. Nor did he explain why he allowed 
his mortgage to become delinquent. He blames his wife’s inability to find employment 
for six years after her college graduation, but nothing more. He has shown an inability 
and unwillingness to pay his debts in a responsible manner. AG ¶ 19 (a) is established. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant also has a history of not paying these debts in a timely fashion. AG ¶ 19 (c) is 
established. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if Applicant’s wife’s lack of employment were shown by 
Applicant to have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. He offered 
nothing more than the conclusionary statement that it was her lack of an income that 
caused the financial inability to pay his debts. Applicant did not submit any documents 
showing his income during the last six years and why from that income he could not pay 
these debts. Nor did he show why since April 2015 when his wife started working that 
he did not catch up on his debt payments. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that 
issue. 
 
Applicant contends his Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing, which required financial 
counseling, shows that he is trying to resolve his problems.. There is no discharge in 
bankruptcy offered to show that the court granted that status. Education debts are 
generally not dischargeable in bankruptcy.  AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply because his 
debt is not resolved or under control. No other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He did not take any action in the past three years to pay small debts 
or take action to resolve his larger delinquent debts. His inaction leaves him vulnerable 
to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the magnitude of his financial 
obligations. After the SOR was sent to him he started a Chapter 7 bankruptcy action in 
late 2015. He did not take any action before then to resolve these debts. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment by incurring the delinquencies. Next, he exhibited a 
continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his 
delinquent debts during the past three years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
         
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
