Item 4.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00424
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant is a U.S. citizen who obtained dual citizenship from a foreign country
and a foreign passport in 2008. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based
on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 6, 2012.1
On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).  The action was taken under Executive Order2
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
Item 3.3
Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 5 comprises an unsworn4
summary of Applicant’s interview by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), that
was conducted on April 19, 2012.  Per Directive ¶ E3.1.20 this ROI summary is inadmissible, absent either 
adoption by Applicant or evidence from an authenticating witness. It will not be considered in this decision.
Item 3.5
Items 3 and 4.6
2
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on August 20, 2015, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
November 2, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was4
received by Applicant on November 18, 2015, and he was afforded the opportunity to
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days
of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely submitted a statement in response to the
FORM, including documentation that he surrendered his foreign passport to his Facility
Security Officer (FSO). Department Counsel indicated that he had no objection to
consideration of Applicant’s FORM response, which is admitted into the record as
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. I received the case assignment on January 7, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 33 years old. He worked for a Federal contractor from August 2011
until January 2014, when he resigned on favorable terms. He is currently employed by
another Federal contractor and continues to seek a clearance in connection with that
position. He earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in May 2004, and a
master’s degree in business administration (MBA) in May 2010. He is married, with no
children.  5
Applicant admitted the truth of the two SOR allegations, with explanations. His
admissions are incorporated into the following findings.
Applicant was born in Connecticut in 1982, and both of his parents are also
native-born U.S. citizens. In 2004, while still in college, he began the process of
applying for dual citizenship in Ireland. He said that he did this to better understand his
family history, to expand his employment opportunities in the European Union (EU) after
graduating from college, and to facilitate foreign travel. His college girlfriend, who is now
his wife, is a dual U.S. and United Kingdom (U.K.) citizen. They had ambitions of living
abroad after graduation, before settling down in the United States.6
Items 3 and 4.7
Items 3, 4, and 6.8
Items 3 and 6; AE A.9
3
On May 1, 2008, Applicant was granted Irish citizenship and was issued an Irish
passport, which will expire in May 2018. Applicant admitted that he used his Irish
passport to travel to Europe on four occasions between March 2010 and October 2011.
The first trip was made in connection with his MBA studies. The next three were made
in connection with his wedding and honeymoon. These trips involved travel to the U.K.,
France, Greece, and Italy. Applicant stated that travel notifications were filed with his
FSO for all travel as required. He also said that he does “not have a preference for a
foreign country over the United States” and has “never even been to Ireland.”  7
Applicant revealed his dual citizenship and possession of a current Irish passport
on his March 2012 SF-86. During May 2012, it became apparent to him and his
employer that this could raise security concerns. He said that he did not want the
passport destroyed, but agreed to surrender it to his FSO for the duration of his
employment at that company.8
When he left employment with that contractor in January 2014, he asked the
company’s FSO to return his Irish passport to him. The FSO submitted an appropriate
incident report of the matter on JPAS. On July 22, 2015, after he began working for his
current employer, Applicant surrendered his Irish passport to that company’s FSO for
safekeeping and return to him upon his request. He acknowledged that return of his
foreign passport would require the FSO to submit a JPAS incident report, which could
result in revocation or denial of his security clearance.9
The record lacks any other evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he
elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
4
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 security concerns involving foreign preference arise because,
“[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country
over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
5
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying under this guideline:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship
requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in conflict with the national security interest; and
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
The evidence in this case established security concerns under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1)
and (b). Applicant obtained his foreign passport in 2008, and used it exclusively for his
foreign travel since then. He is a U.S. citizen by birth, but from 2004 to 2008 he applied
for and obtained Irish citizenship in anticipation of traveling, living, and working abroad,
primarily in the European Union. He has exercised no other rights, privileges, or
obligations of an Irish citizen, and has never been to Ireland.  
6
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security
concerns:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority;
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
 
The only potentially mitigating condition for which there is admissible record
evidence is AG ¶ 11(e). Applicant’s Irish passport was surrendered to the FSO at his
previous employer in May 2012, and again to his current FSO in July 2015. However,
both times his surrender of possession was on the condition that the passport remain in
a current and valid status, and be returned to Applicant upon request or separation from
employment. The degree of mitigation established under these circumstances is
minimal, given that this mitigating condition describes surrender of the passport as
being equivalent to its being, “destroyed . . . or otherwise invalidated.”
I have considered that the October 2008 revision of Guideline C for Sensitive
Compartmented Information (SCI) access under Intelligence Community Policy
Guidance (ICPG) 704.2, is the only guideline that differed from the AG approved for
basic security clearance eligibility. As an administrative judge, I have no authority to
modify, or to fail to apply, AG Guideline C as written in 2006 since this case involves
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, rather than eligibility for access to SCI. I
would note, however, that Applicant’s conduct was in total compliance with ICPG 704.2,
which expressly states:
The principal goal of the Foreign Preference assessment is to determine
the risk based on foreign associations that information may be
compromised if access is approved; it is not a measurement of how loyal a
subject is to the United States. Therefore, a finding that there is a
preference must be established by adequate evidence of heightened risk
related to national security. Furthermore, the fact that a U.S. citizen is or
has become a citizen of another country does not establish a preference
AG ¶ 6.10
7
for a foreign country. Being a U.S. citizen and a citizen of another country
is not prohibited or disqualifying absent a showing of heightened risks
related to national security. The same is true for the exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship or action to acquire or obtain
recognition of a foreign citizenship by a U.S. citizen.  
In that respect it is anomalous that he would be eligible for access to Sensitive
Compartmented Information (SCI) and other controlled access program information.
This decision is further constrained by the fact that Guideline C, unlike Guideline B
(Foreign Influence),  contains no provision permitting consideration of the identity of the10
foreign country involved and whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain
protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
and experienced adult, who is responsible for the voluntary choices and deliberate
conduct that caused the Government’s prima facie security concerns. His explanations
and motivations for maintaining his dual citizenship and the ability to obtain and use his
foreign passport were insufficient to meet his burden to establish mitigation under the
applicable adjudicative guideline. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, and the
adjudicative guideline concerned, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
