1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-01247 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 3, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated May 16, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct under Guideline E. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 5, 2015. He admitted the nine delinquent 
debts, and denied the personal conduct allegation based on falsification of his security 
clearance application. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 29, 2015, 
and the case was assigned to me on August 31, 2015. A notice of hearing was sent to 
Applicant on October 23, 2015, scheduling a hearing for November 4, 2015. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits that I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4. 
Applicant testified, and submitted one exhibit that I marked and admitted into the record 
without objection as Applicant Exhibit (AX) A. I kept the record open for Applicant to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted four documents that I marked 
and admitted into the record as AX B through AX E. Department Counsel did not object 
to the admission of the additional documents. (GX 5, e-mail, dated November 30, 2015). 
I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 13, 2015. The record closed 
on November 30, 2015, on receipt of Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 36 years old and has been employed as a diver for a defense 
contractor since January 2015. Applicant served on active duty in the Navy as a diver 
from January 2000 until October 2008, when he received an honorable discharge as a 
first class petty officer (E-6), and he was placed on the Temporarily Disabled Retired 
List (TDRL). Applicant married in February 2009 and has two small children. (Tr. 16-19; 
GX 1, e-QIP, dated March 25, 2013) 
 
The SOR alleges and credit reports (GX 3, dated April 13, 2013; GX 4, dated 
January 23, 2014) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a charged off 
debt on a credit union credit card for $15,628 (SOR 1.a); a judgment by a department 
store for $8,268 (SOR 1.b); a charged off credit card for $1,604 (SOR 1.c); an account 
placed for collection for $720 (SOR 1.d); a cable debt in collection for $284 (SOR 1.e); 
medical debts in collection for $163 (SOR 1.f), $143 (SOR 1.g), and $72 (SOR 1.h); and 
a medical debt in judgment for $192 (SOR 1.i). The amount of the delinquent debt is 
approximately $27,000. 
 
After his discharge from the Navy in 2008, Applicant had periods of 
unemployment. He was unemployed from October 2008 until February 2009, but 
worked odd jobs for which he received some income. He did not receive unemployment 
compensation. He was employed fulltime by a defense contractor as a diver from March 
2009 until August 2010 at a salary of $55,000 annually. In August 2010, he switched 
employment to another defense contractor as a senior diving and salvage instructor at 
an annual salary of $72,000. His company lost the contract he was working under and 
he was unemployed from September 2011 until March 2013. He drew unemployment 
compensation of $300 monthly for about eight months of this unemployment. In April 
2013, he found employment as a carpenter with a private company until October 2013 
3 
 
when he was laid off. He was employed as a diver from October 2013 until January 
2015 with a defense contractor on an as needed basis. He was rarely needed during 
this time as the company’s diving program was not functional, so he had limited income 
during this time. He started working with his present defense contractor employer 
fulltime in January 2015. (Tr. 18-20, 21-23; GX 1, e-QIP, dated March 25, 2013)  
 
During some of the periods of unemployment, Applicant’s wife was employed as 
a speech pathologist on an as needed basis. Her income, when working, was 
approximately $55,000 annually. His wife also had periods of unemployment basically 
because of maternity leave. At the time of the hearing, she was on maternity leave but 
expected to return to work in early 2016. Applicant’s present monthly net income, 
including disability, is approximately $4,200. His net monthly expenses are 
approximately $4,200, so he has limited discretionary funds. He states that he is living 
paycheck to paycheck. When his wife returns to work from maternity leave in early 
2016, the family will have significantly more funds to apply to resolve debts. Applicant 
noted that when he has been employed since being discharged from the Navy, he was 
current on his debts. Since he started his latest employment in January 2015, he has 
been current with all of his current bills. He has been able to make some payments on 
his past–due obligations. (Tr. 16-17, 20-21, 38-44) 
 
The delinquent debt to a credit union at SOR 1.a is for a credit card opened by 
Applicant in 2010 to consolidate other credit card debts to obtain a lower interest rate 
and for medical debts. He also used the card to purchase items needed for daily living. 
The two credit cards that he consolidated were also used to purchase daily living items 
such as groceries. When he first opened the account, his monthly required payments 
were approximately $300, but he usually made larger payments. When he lost his 
employment, he could only afford to pay his mortgage, buy groceries, and purchase 
other necessities. His monthly mortgage payments alone were $2,100. He was unable 
to make payments on his other debts. He stopped using this credit card, and eventually 
the credit union charged off the account. When he started his new position in January 
2015, he contacted the credit union and agreed to start making payments on the debt in 
January 2015. Applicant presented a post-hearing document to verify a $200 payment 
in November 2015 to the creditor, leaving an account balance of $14,369.28. This 
reduction in the amount of the debt indicated that Applicant has made $200 monthly 
payments on the debt since January 2015. Applicant also stated that he is hoping to pay 
the account in full rather than continue to make the minimum payments. Applicant 
presented sufficient information to verify this debt is being resolved. (Tr. 23-27; AX B, 
letter, dated November 10, 2015; GX 5, e-mails dated November 30, 2015)  
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.b is for a credit card opened in 2010. Applicant 
used the card to start a business buying damaged audio equipment. He would repair 
the equipment and sell it on the internet. The business did not succeed in that Applicant 
paid more for the damaged equipment than he made on resale. He made payments on 
the credit card of approximately $200 a month until late 2012. He offered to make lower 
payments but he was not able to make those payments when unemployed. The creditor 
entered a judgment against Applicant. Instead of having his wages garnished, Applicant 
4 
 
paid the judgment in June 2015, using all of the savings he and his wife accumulated 
since gaining employment in January 2015. His bank statement reflects an over $8,000 
payment to the creditor. Applicant’s attorney’s requested that the garnishment order be 
lifted. The SOR 1.b debt is resolved. (Tr. 27-32, AX A., Garnishment Disposition, dated 
June 25, 2015; AX C, Bank Statement, dated June 10, 2015) 
 
Applicant claims the credit card debt at SOR 1.c, used for groceries and other 
items when he was unemployed, was paid in mid-2015. He has been attempting to 
obtain proper documentation that the debt has been paid. He has not received the 
documents from the creditor, so he has not been able to provide documents to verify his 
claim of payment. However, the documents he presented reflecting payment of his other 
debts shows his claim of payment of this debt is credible. (Tr. 32-33) 
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.d is a debt to a music supply store. Applicant 
purchased items from the store to use in his hobby as a musician. Applicant claims the 
debt is paid in full. Applicant’s post-hearing submission includes his bank statements of 
September 2014 showing a payment of $731.10 to the collection agency. The debt has 
been paid in full and resolved. (Tr. 33-34; AX C, Bank Statement, dated October 10, 
2014) 
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.e is for a cable company. Applicant closed his 
cable account believing that he had paid his entire debt to the cable company. He 
subsequently learned he had a balance on the account. His bank statement shows the 
account has been paid in full and resolved. (Tr. 34-35; AX D, Bank Statement, dated 
July 2015) 
 
The delinquent debts at SOR 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i are medical debts. When 
Applicant was medically retired, his medical expenses were covered under the military’s 
medical system for five years since he was on the TDRL. Applicant incurred these 
medical expenses when he was being evaluated for a permanent placement on the 
TDRL at the end of five years. He was later granted permanent disability entitling him to 
use the military health care system, TRICARE. Applicant disputed these debts with the 
medical providers and TRICARE. TRICARE will accept resubmission of the debts for 
payment. While Applicant’s dispute is still pending, he claims in his post-hearing 
submission to have voluntarily paid the small medical debts at SOR 1.f and 1.g. He 
provided no verification of these payments. Applicant established the legitimate nature 
of the dispute and his attempts to have the dispute resolved. (Tr. 35-37, 45-48) 
  
Applicant denied intentional falsification of his security clearance application 
when he did not include any adverse financial issues on his e-QIP. He told the security 
investigator that he was unaware of the delinquent debts, had not received 
correspondence from the creditors, and did not have credit cards issued by some of the 
alleged creditors. He told the security investigator that he did not agree with the financial 
information presented by the investigator. He did not believe he had delinquent debt 
because he was making payments on the debts. However, Applicant stopped payments 
on some of his debt when he lost his employment.  
5 
 
At the hearing, Applicant stated that prior to completion of his e-QIP he had not 
checked his credit reports. Applicant testified that he was making payments on his 
accounts and the balances on the accounts have been reduced. In his post-hearing 
submission, Applicant reiterated that he did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP. He did 
acknowledge that after reviewing his credit reports he had at least one delinquent 
medical debt at the time he completed his e-QIP. (Tr. 48-51; GX 5, e-mail, dated 
November 30, 2015)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations.  
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant incurred delinquent debt after his 
medical discharge from the Navy. He and his wife had periods of unemployment 
resulting in their inability to meet all of their financial obligations. Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debts is documented in his credit reports, his responses to questions of the 
OPM investigator at the personal subject interview, and his SOR response. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are a security concern. The evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under the Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and (c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates only an inability to satisfy delinquent debt. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
7 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
The mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 (a) applies in part. Applicant’s unpaid debts 
are a continuous course of conduct and thus current. Applicant incurred the delinquent 
debt during periods of unemployment. He used credit cards to purchase the necessities 
he needed for his family. Applicant is now steadily employed and has been making 
payments on his delinquent debts since January 2015. He also has not incurred any 
additional delinquent debt since he commenced his steady employment in January 
2015. His wife will shortly also start to be employed after completing maternity leave. 
Since Applicant and his wife will have steady employment, it is unlikely that he will incur 
additional delinquent debt.  
 
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
when he and his wife were unemployed. This problem was largely beyond his control. 
He acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has shown that he has paid some of 
his large debts (SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.e) and disputed or paid the medical debts (SOR 1.e to 
1.i). He established that he is making payments on his largest debt (SOR 1.a). Applicant 
claims to have paid the debt at SOR 1.c, but has not received verifying documents from 
the creditor.  
 
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(d) applies. For a good-faith effort under AG ¶ 
20(d), there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of 
handling debts is needed. Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay 
delinquent debts in the future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a 
timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish 
that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems and has taken significant 
action to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant has a systematic plan to pay or resolve the past-due debts. He 
presented information to show payment of four of the five non-medical debts. He 
presented information to show he is making payments on his only remaining debt. He 
paid two medical debts even though he is disputing them. The evidence indicates that 
8 
 
Applicant’s past-due debts have been or are being paid and resolved.  Applicant has 
acted reasonably under the circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies. Applicant was covered by the military medical system when 
he incurred medical debts for treatment under civilian care in 2013 and 2014. He has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the medical debts since he was on the TDRL when he 
incurred the debts. He filed his dispute with both the creditors and the military medical 
system.  
 
Applicant has taken reasonable action to resolve his past-due delinquent debts. 
He presented sufficient information to support responsible management of his finances. 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has shown that he is 
managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and his 
financial problems are behind him. There is ample evidence of responsible behavior, 
good judgment, and reliability. Applicant’s actions towards his finances are a strong 
indication that he will act to protect and safeguard classified information. Based on all of 
the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns 
based on financial considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
On his e-QIP, Appellant answered “no” to a question asking if in the last seven 
years, he had collection accounts, credit cards charged off, or past-due accounts. The 
credit reports show that Applicant did have such accounts. Applicant’s omission of 
delinquent accounts from his security clearance application raises a security concern 
under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
9 
 
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The 
Government established that Applicant omitted facts from his March 25, 2013 e-QIP 
when he failed to list any adverse financial information. In his response to the SOR and 
at the hearing, Applicant denied intentional falsifying information on the e-QIP. When 
the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving 
it. Prove of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time of 
the omission.  
 
Applicant did not deliberately fail to provide correct and accurate information on 
the security clearance application. Applicant and his wife had had extensive periods of 
unemployment. The family had limited income, so Applicant used credit cards to 
purchase necessities for the family. He admitted that when unemployed, he stopped 
making most of the payments on his credit cards. When employed, he made payments 
on his debts.  
 
His testimony as to how the security clearance application was completed is 
credible. He did not check his credit report before completing his security clearance 
application. Since, he was making payments on his debts he did not believe he had 
delinquent debt. He had not used some of the credit cards in a long time and was not 
aware of a delinquent balance. He had not received notices from the creditors that he 
was delinquent on some accounts. When the questions on his finances were raised 
during the security interview, he was open and candid with the investigator that he was 
not aware of the debts but that they were being resolved. He had logical and fact-based 
reasons for believing he did not have delinquent debt. Therefore, the information does 
not establish that Applicant deliberately provided false and misleading information on 
the security clearance application.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant eight years of 
honorable active duty in the Navy. I considered that Applicant’s and his wife’s 
unemployment were circumstances beyond his control. He acted reasonably to manage 
his finances and pay past-due delinquent debts under the circumstances. He has paid 
the majority of those debts, and is making payments on his last remaining debt. He 
acted reasonable under the circumstances and showed responsible management of his 
finances. Applicant’s reasonable and responsible financial management indicates that 
he will be concerned and act responsibly in regard to classified information. Applicant 
did not deliberately fail to provide accurate and correct financial information on his 
security clearance application. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
