1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01571 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 5, 2014. On August 
23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 12, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on November 23, 2015. On 
November 30, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
2 
 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 14, 2015. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until January 8, 2016, 
to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on December 22, 2015. 
 
 Applicant submitted an e-mail with missing attachments on January 8, 2016. 
After being contacted about the incomplete e-mail, he submitted AX D through G on 
February 22, 2016, which were admitted without objection. The record closed on 
February 23, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.l, and 1.p. 
He denied SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.e-1.k, 1.m-1.o, 1.q, and 1.r. His admissions in his answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old service delivery representative employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for defense communications contractors since August 2003. 
He holds an active security clearance. (Tr. 7.) 
 
 Applicant attended a technical college from February 2003 to April 2004 and 
received an associate’s degree in computer science. He served on active duty in the 
U.S. Navy from June 1993 to June 1997 and received an honorable discharge.  
 
 Applicant married in November 2002 and divorced in April 2005. He has a 17-
year-old daughter from a previous relationship. He testified that his financial problems 
began when he divorced and incurred expenses setting up a new household for himself 
and his daughter, who is a high school student and lives with him. (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) from May 2014 and January 2015 
reflect 18 delinquent debts. The evidence concerning the debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g, penalty for early lease termination ($8,424 and $8,217). 
Applicant cosigned a lease for a friend and became liable when the friend terminated 
the lease early. He contacted his friend shortly after being interviewed by a security 
investigator in June 2014, but she has not responded. The two debts have different 
account numbers. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was referred for collection in February 2012, 
and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g was referred in October 2013. (GX 2 at 7.) Applicant 
admitted that he is liable for one of the debts, but he filed a dispute with the credit 
bureau because he believed that the two debts were duplicates. (Tr. 29-32.) Both debts 
were reflected on Applicant’s May 2014 CBR, but only the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
reflected on his June 2015 CBR, indicating that the dispute was resolved in his favor. 
He paid the remaining debt. (AX G.) 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, penalty for early termination of cell phone contract ($1,364). 
Applicant denied this debt in is response to the SOR. At the hearing, he admitted that 
he owed a penalty, but he disagreed with the amount. As of the date the record closed, 
he had not disputed or resolved the debt. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, satellite television service ($730). Applicant has not contacted the 
creditor. The debt is not resolved. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, cell phone bill ($425). Applicant admitted this debt but has not 
resolved it. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, telecommunications service ($56). Applicant paid this debt in 
December 2015. (AX F.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, collection account ($636). Applicant denied this debt and testified 
that he does not know the basis for it. He has not filed a dispute with the credit bureau 
because he was waiting for the debt to “age off” his credit report in accordance with the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act.1 (Tr. 37-38.) The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k, student loans for $1,186; $964; and $723. Applicant 
paid $50 per month under a rehabilitation agreement beginning in May 2014. (Tr. 41-43; 
AX B; AX E.) The loans are not reflected on his January 2015 CBR. They are resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i, medical bill ($1,058). Applicant has not contacted the creditor or 
taken any action to dispute or resolve this debt. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l, collection account for loan ($307). Applicant admitted this debt. He 
made a few occasional payments on this debt before it was referred for collection in 
April 2014. It is unresolved. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m, library debt ($237). Applicant incurred this debt by failing to return 
library books on time. He testified that he returned the books by dropping them in the 
return slot at the library, but the library claimed he had not returned all the books. He 
has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
 SOR 1.n, auto insurance ($102). Applicant terminated his insurance contract 
and disagreed with the amount the insurance company claimed that he owed at the time 
of termination. He claimed he owed $50. He testified that he intended to pay this debt, 
but he had not done so by the time the record closed. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
                                                          
1 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection or 
charged off that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of limitations has 
run, which is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.p and 1.q, medical bill ($97), auto insurance ($94), and fire 
insurance ($72). Applicant has taken no action to dispute or resolve these debts. (Tr. 
49-52.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.r, municipal debt ($71). At the hearing, Applicant claimed that he did 
not know the basis for this debt. After the hearing, he submitted evidence that a tax lien 
had been released. The debt is resolved. (AX D; Tr. 52.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant submitted a written plan for resolving his debts. The 
plan provides for him to (1) contact his creditors, offer settlement, and resolve them 
starting with the lowest balances and advancing to higher balances; (2) dispute 
inaccurate and erroneous CBR information; (3) continue to pay credit card accounts; (4) 
avoid new debts; and (5) obtain credit monitoring service and consider a credit report 
freeze. (AX C.) 
 
Applicant became aware of the debts alleged in the SOR when he was 
interviewed about them by an investigator in June 2014. He did not promptly start 
paying the smaller debts, as provided for in his debt-resolution plan, because he “just 
didn’t put a high priority on it right then and there.” (Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is about $2,600 per month. He pays rent of $1,050. 
He has no car payment. He usually has a net monthly remainder of about $600 or $700. 
He has three credit cards, on which the payments are current. He has about $10,000 in 
his retirement account. (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
5 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
6 
 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBRs establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions 
under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s marital breakup in 2005 and his 
friend’s failure to comply with her lease were circumstances beyond his control. The 
record contains no evidence indicating that the medical debts were unexpected. 
Applicant has acted responsibly by rehabilitating his student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, and 
1.k) and resolving the lease termination penalty (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g), but he has taken 
no action to resolve the debts alleged SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.l-1.q. 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. There is no evidence of financial counseling, and 
Applicant’s financial situation is not yet under control. 
 AG 20(d) is established for the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.g, 
1.h, 1.j, 1.k. and 1.r. It is not established for the other delinquent debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g. It is not 
established for the other delinquent debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.r:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
