 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00318 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 9, 2012. On 
June 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 28, 
2015, and elected to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 9, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter that same day. Applicant received the 
FORM on November 19, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to respond to the FORM and 
submit any objections, corrections, and to provide material in extenuation and 
mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any information. The case 
was assigned to me on February 23, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR (with explanations), 
except for SOR ¶ 1.k, which he denied (because he did not recognize the creditor). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1981. He enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1988, where he served until his 
honorable discharge in 1998. While in the Navy, he attended college through a distance 
learning program, and received his bachelor’s degree in 1991 and a master’s degree in 
1998. Applicant married his wife in July 1988. He has two children, ages 27 and 22.  
 
Applicant’s employment record shows that after his discharge he worked as 
senior engineer for a large federal contractor from 1998 to 2005. He was hired by his 
current employer, another large federal contractor, in 2005. As of 2012, he was the 
company’s director of information technology.  
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2012 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether he had any financial problems, including delinquent or in-collection debts; loan 
defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; and whether he 
was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. Applicant answered “yes” and 
disclosed some of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant explained that his wife’s business fell apart during the housing market 
collapse (around 2007-2009), and without her income, they could not afford to pay their 
financial obligations and their living expenses. Applicant stated that they were in too 
much debt. They tried to make ends meet, but were unsuccessful, and many of the 
accounts were charged off. He indicated that he had taken no action to resolve his 
financial problems. He explained that his home was foreclosed because they could not 
make the mortgage payments, and the bank was unwilling to work with them. 
Concerning his current financial status (as of 2012), he indicated that he was still in 
debt, but starting to get back on his feet and trying to make amends. 
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the 11 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $348,536. The SOR allegations 
are established by Applicant’s admissions and the FORM credit reports.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h alleged the 
same account. A review of the credit reports in evidence support his position. Thus, 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h will be consolidated under SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant claimed that he 
had tried numerous times to reach the creditor, but received no response. Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence of any efforts to contact this creditor or of any 
payments made. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l. He claimed that he had paid off all of these accounts, 
but presented no documentary evidence of any efforts to contact the creditors, payment 
plans established, or of any payments made. The FORM credit reports do not support 
his claims that he paid the accounts. On the contrary, the credit reports show the debts 
as delinquent or charged off.  
 
Concerning the delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant admitted 
this was his mortgage and claimed the mortgage was forgiven in 2014. The FORM 
credit reports (the most recent from November 2015) show that the “foreclosure process 
started.” However, there is no evidence to show that the property was sold and that the 
proceeds of the foreclosure satisfied the debt, or that Applicant was released of financial 
responsibility. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to support his claim that 
the mortgage was forgiven.   
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant admitted this was his delinquent credit card 
account and claimed that he was working with the creditor to repay the debt. He 
presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. Applicant denied the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, and indicated that he did not know “what this is.” The account is 
established by the 2012 credit report; however, it is not reflected on the 2014 and 2015 
credit reports. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show that he 
investigated the debt and disputed it. I note that the credit reports show Applicant paid a 
$1,050 judgment in May 2010, and that he has many accounts in good standing.  
 
Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in 
financial counseling or whether he follows a budget. Although he claimed in his answer 
to the SOR that he had resolved or was in the process of resolving most of the 
delinquent accounts, he presented no documentary evidence of debts paid, payment 
agreements made, of efforts to contact creditors, or of efforts to otherwise resolve his 
financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
4 
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
5 
 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems that date back to 2007-
2009. His financial problems raise the applicability of the following financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are ongoing, and he presented insufficient evidence to show his 
debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant’s presented insufficient evidence of periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, or of other facts that could establish circumstances beyond his 
control that may have contributed or aggravated his financial problems. Applicant 
averred, in general terms, that his financial problems resulted from his wife’s failed 
business during the downturn of the real estate market. However, he presented no 
evidence to show how they acquired their debts, why they became delinquent, and what 
efforts they took to try to resolve their debts.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to 2007-2009. He submitted his SCA in 
2012, indicating that he was trying to resolve his financial problems. He was issued the 
SOR in June 2015 and the FORM in November 2015. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed 
to submit documentary evidence to show his efforts to contact creditors, establish 
payment plans, or of any payments made to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
 In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). He presented insufficient 
evidence to show that he initiated good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in financial 
counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his 
financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish that 
he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years of service in the Navy and his years 
working for federal contractors. Notwithstanding, he failed to submit sufficient evidence 
to show that he has a track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g, 1.i, 1.j,   Against Applicant 
  and 1.l:       
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
