 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00256 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports and statement of reasons (SOR) allege six delinquent 
debts totaling $20,165. Applicant resolved all of the SOR debts, except for one debt for 
$7,678, which is in a payment plan. While additional sustained financial effort is 
necessary, he has established a track record of debt payment and resolution. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is 
granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On August 28, 2011, and February 3, 2014, Applicant completed and signed 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1, 2) On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
 
2 
                                         
 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
On September 8, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On October 28, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
November 5, 2015, the case was assigned to me. On January 8, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for January 28, 2016. (HE 1) For technical reasons, DOHA was unable to establish a 
video teleconference (VTC) connection with Applicant’s overseas location. (Transcript 
(Tr.) 12) Applicant waived his right to an in-person and VTC hearing, and elected to 
present his case using teleconference as his communication medium. (Tr. 12-13) 
Applicant waived any objection to the timeliness or content of the notice. (Tr. 16-17) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered eight exhibits, and Applicant 
offered seven exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 19-23; 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1-8; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-G) He provided one exhibit after 
his hearing, which was admitted without objection. (AE H) On February 3, 2016, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.f. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
an inventory specialist in a warehouse at an overseas location for two years. (Tr. 6, 15, 
24) In 1998, he married, and in December 2012, he divorced. (Tr. 10) He has a 16-year-
old daughter from his first marriage. (Tr. 10) In 2015, he married, and his spouse has a 
13-year-old child. (Tr. 10)  
 
In 1993, Applicant graduated from high school, and he is currently attending 
college. (Tr. 6) His goal is to complete his bachelor’s degree in business with a focus in 
logistics. (Tr. 7) In 1993, he joined the Army, and in 2013, he honorably retired from 
active service as a sergeant first class (E-7). (Tr. 7-8) He served in Iraq from June 2004 
to June 2005 and from April 2008 to May 2009. (AE H) He served in Afghanistan from 
February 2011 to February 2012. (Tr. 7; AE H) His military occupational specialty was 
maintenance supervisor (91X). (Tr. 8) He receives 80 percent disability ($1,645 
monthly) from the Department of Veterans Affairs. (VA). (Tr. 8-9, 26)   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by his divorce and by debts his 
former spouse failed to pay while he was deployed to combat zones. Applicant’s credit 
reports, SOR, and SOR response established the following delinquent debts, and their 
status is as follows: 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off debt for $7,678. Applicant borrowed the money 
from the creditor to finance his divorce. (Tr. 28) Applicant recently reached an 
agreement with the creditor to pay $235 monthly until the debt is half paid, and then he 
will pay the remainder of the debt with a lump-sum payment. (Tr. 28-32) He made the 
first payment of $235. (Tr. 28)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a charged-off credit card debt for $410. (Tr. 33) On August 31, 
2015, Applicant paid the debt in full. (Tr. 33; AE B) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a collection account resulting from an electrical debt for $168. 
(Tr. 35) On August 31, 2015, Applicant paid this debt. (Tr. 35; AE C)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a charged-off account with a zero balance. (Tr. 36) In January 
2013, Applicant paid off the debt to the creditor. (Tr. 36) He recently checked with the 
creditor, and the creditor said his account was closed. (Tr. 36-37; AE F) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a charged-off debt for $6,531, and ¶ 1.f alleges a charged-off 
debt for $5,378. The debts are duplications of each other. (Tr. 37-38) In 2013, Applicant 
received an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-C. (Tr. 37-40; AE D) The IRS 
contacted Applicant and advised him he owed an additional $987 in federal income 
taxes because of the release from the creditor. (Tr. 38) In 2015, Applicant paid the debt 
to the IRS. (Tr. 38-39)   
 
Applicant’s SOR does not list a debt owed to the Defense Finance and 
Accounting Service (DFAS). Applicant said that DFAS was collecting $37,727 from his 
military retired pay because of a debt owed when he was on active duty. (Tr. 41-42; GE 
7 at 2) When Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan, his spouse received a housing 
allowance. When he returned to the United States, DFAS advised him that he had an 
overpayment because he was not supposed to receive a housing allowance while he 
was deployed. (Tr. 47) He did not receive disciplinary action because of the receipt of 
excess housing allowance. DFAS may be erroneously collecting from his retirement pay 
as his spouse and daughter were not living in government housing while he was 
deployed, and at the time of his deployment to Afghanistan, he was not divorced. (Tr. 
47) Applicant said he would check with DFAS to ensure the debt was valid. (Tr. 47)   
 
Applicant currently has $9,800 in his savings account. (Tr. 44) He does not have 
any credit cards, and his taxes are paid. (Tr. 44-45) He does not have any non-SOR 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 41-45) Applicant promised to timely pay his debts. He discussed 
his expenses and income, and he has sufficient income to keep his debts in current 
status and to continue making progress paying his remaining SOR debt and DFAS.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s DD Form 214 reflects the following awards: Iraq Campaign Medal 
with two Campaign Stars; Meritorious Service Medal; Combat Life Commendation 
Medal (6th Award); Army Achievement Medal (5th Award); Army Good Conduct Medal 
(5th Award); National Defense Service Medal (2nd Award); Afghanistan Campaign Medal 
 
4 
                                         
 
with two Campaign Stars; Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal; Global War on 
Terrorism Service Medal; Noncommissioned Officer Professional Development Ribbon 
(3rd Award); Army Service Ribbon; Overseas Service Ribbon (4th Award); Kosovo 
Campaign Medal with Bronze Service Star; NATO Medal (2nd Award); and Driver and 
Mechanic Badge. (AE H) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
                                         
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. Applicant’s 
SOR alleges, and the evidence establishes a history of six delinquent debts totaling 
$20,165. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his 
divorce and debts generated while he was deployed. These are circumstances beyond 
his control which adversely affected his finances. Applicant paid or resolved five of the 
six debts listed on his SOR. He has a payment plan to address the remaining SOR debt 
for $7,678.   
 
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to timely pay his debts, future 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of some of his debts 
showed good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to 
continue making progress paying his remaining delinquent debt. His efforts are 
sufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Even if Applicant 
provided insufficient information to mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 20, he 
mitigated security concerns under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
an inventory specialist in a warehouse at an overseas location for two years. Applicant 
is currently attending college, and his goal is to complete his bachelor’s degree in 
business with a focus in logistics. In 2013, he honorable retired from active service as a 
sergeant first class. He served in Iraq from June 2004 to June 2005 and from April 2008 
to May 2009. He served in Afghanistan from February 2011 to February 2012. He 
receives 80 percent disability from the VA.    
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR establish a history of five delinquent debts 
totaling less than $15,000, after accounting for the duplicated debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 
1.f. Applicant resolved all of the SOR debts, except for one debt for $7,678, which is in a 
payment plan. Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by his deployments and his 
divorce in December 2012. He acted responsibly under the circumstances by working to 
resolve his debts. He promised to pay the remaining unpaid SOR debt for $7,678. He 
understands that he needs to pay his debts, and the conduct required to retain his 
 
8 
                                         
 
security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.2 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
2The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow [the applicant] the opportunity to have a security clearance while 
[the applicant] works on [his or] her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
