 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00997 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used his wife’s prescribed pain medication for his ankle pain 
subsequent to surgeries. His physician had previously prescribed the same drug for 
him. He disclosed the illegal drug use in his security clearance application and during an 
investigative interview. He mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 5.) On August 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. The action was taken pursuant to DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
On September 1, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.) On September 30, 
2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items. She mailed Applicant a complete copy of the FORM on October 2, 2015. He 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
received the FORM on October 20, 2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to file 
objections and submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a document, 
which I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. He did not file objections to the documents 
contained in the Department’s FORM, and Department Counsel did not object to 
Applicant’s exhibit. All Items and AE A are admitted into the record. On November 5, 
2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole allegation contained in 
the SOR. His admission is accepted as a factual finding.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2002. He is married and has a child. (Item 5.) 
 
When Applicant completed his July 2014 SF-86, he disclosed that between June 
2013 and April 2014, he used Vicodin,1 a medication prescribed to his wife for pain, 
about 20 times. He said he used the medication to relieve ankle pain he was 
experiencing after four surgeries. He stated that his physician had previously prescribed 
the drug for him to alleviate inflammation and pain. In September 2015 his physician 
again prescribed it for him. (Item 4; AE A.) During an investigative interview in October 
2014, he acknowledged that he should not have used his wife’s medication and that his 
actions displayed poor judgment. He denied having a substance abuse problem and 
has never participated in a treatment program. He does not intend to use illegal drugs in 
the future. (Item 6.) There is no evidence that Applicant has been arrested, charged, or 
convicted of a drug-related crime or any other criminal offense. (GE 5.)  
 
Applicant explained that when he disclosed the above information in his security 
clearance application he “did so with the intent of full disclosure.” (Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
                                            
1 Vicodin is a DEA Controlled Substance Schedule II drug, prescribed for pain management.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug2 can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled 
Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, 
and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.  
  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
One drug involvement disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 25(a) could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse.”3 This disqualifying 
condition applies because Applicant admitted that he illegally used his wife’s controlled 
substance medication about 20 times from June 2013 to April 2014. 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004.) Applicant disclosed in his SF-86 and during an investigative interview that he 
illegally used his wife’s prescribed medication 20 times from June 2013 to April 2014. 
He used the medication to alleviate ankle pain subsequent to four surgeries, and 
because he had been prescribed the drug in the past. He has not used any medication 
                                            
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
illegally since April 2014. Based on his honest disclosure and the circumstances 
surrounding his usage, similar conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) provides 
mitigation. Applicant stated in his interview that he does not intend to use drugs illegally 
in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) has some application. 
 
The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 26(c). Initially Applicant used 
Vicodin under prescription subsequent to his surgeries, and abused it after his 
prescription ran out. He has since received another prescription from his physician, so is 
no longer abusing his wife’s medication. AG ¶ 26(d) is not applicable. Applicant did not 
abuse drugs that were legally prescribed for him. He has not participated in a substance 
abuse treatment program. Hence, he did not provide proof of satisfactory completion of 
a prescribed drug treatment program, including rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, or a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The factors in favor of granting Applicant access to classified information are 
persuasive. When completing his July 2014 SF-86, he honestly disclosed his illegal use 
of a medication prescribed for his wife, which his physician previously prescribed for 
him. He explained, during an investigative interview in October 2014, that he used her 
medication to alleviate his ankle pain, subsequent to four surgeries. He admitted his 
misconduct and stated he will not repeat the behavior in the future. There is no record of 
criminal conduct related to the illegal use of drugs. These factors outweigh the facts 
supporting denial of Applicant’s clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
