 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02052 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2015, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. On December 7, 2015, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on December 8, 2015, and it was received on December 17, 2015. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and 
offered Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A. The Government had no objection and it is admitted 
into evidence. The Government’s documents identified as Items 2 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in SOR with explanations, except ¶ 1.g, 
which she admitted. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. She is a high school graduate. She married in 2001 
and divorced in 2011. She has a 12-year-old child from the marriage. She served in the 
military from 1997 to 2006 and was honorably discharged. She has been employed by 
the same federal contractor since August 2010. Prior to that, she stayed home with her 
child for two months from June 2010 to August 2010. From August 2009 to June 2010 
she was employed, and from June 2006 to August 2009 she stayed home to care for 
her child and was not employed outside of the home.1 
  
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,277. Applicant 
began accumulating delinquent debt in approximately 2010. She disclosed many of the 
alleged debts in her June 2014 security clearance application (SCA). She noted that 
she was unaware of the debts until she obtained a credit report, and reported them on 
the SCA. She also noted that she did not know why she owed many of the alleged 
debts.2  
 
Applicant was asked about the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR when she 
was interviewed by a government investigator in August 2014, as part of her 
background investigation. Applicant again indicated she was unaware of the alleged 
debts. She said she would investigate them and pay those that should be paid. Credit 
reports from December, August and June 2014 reflect the debts alleged in the SOR.3 
 
In Applicant’s November 2015 answer to the SOR, she stated: 
 
There are some of these items that I do not know what they are for. The 
items that I do owe on I have no problem making payments. Most of it I 
can have paid in a few months. I intend to pay for what I owe. I was 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 1, 2, 3, and 6. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
unaware I was in debt this much. I will obtain a copy of my credit report 
and start contacting the creditors this month.4  
 
 In her January 2016 response to the FORM, Applicant stated she had other 
debts she was resolving and when she completed paying those debts, she would begin 
addressing the delinquent debts on her credit report. She indicated she would pay her 
medical bills and the debt owed in SOR ¶ 1.f ($99) by June 2016.5  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($14,997) is a vehicle loan. Applicant acknowledged she 
cosigned the loan with her husband and after they divorced he stopped making the loan 
payments. She indicated in her answer that she was advised by the creditor that she is 
not responsible for the debt and it was charged off in 2011. During her background 
investigation she indicated she was told by her attorney four years ago that she is not 
responsible for the debt. Applicant did not provide documentation to substantiate that 
she is not responsible for the debt or any actions she has taken to dispute the debt. It is 
unresolved.6 
 
Applicant disputes the debts owed in SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($176) and 1.n ($1,558) to a 
communications company. She indicated the company claimed she failed to return its 
equipment and that she owed a remaining balance on a bill. She indicated during her 
background interview that she disputes the debts and did not intend on paying them. 
She did not provide any documents to substantiate her dispute or efforts to resolve the 
issue.7 
 
Applicant admitted she owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($449) to a pet hospital. She 
indicated in her answer she intended to pay it last year when she learned of it, but did 
not. She stated she would pay the debt. She did not provide evidence that she has paid 
the debt. It is unresolved.8  
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to being a single parent. She also 
stated that in May 2015 she took a lower paying job that was less stressful, and she is 
attempting to adjust her monthly bills. She is attending school full time and is receiving 
Veteran’s benefits. She intends on using her Veteran’s benefits and income tax refunds 
to resolve her debts. Applicant did not provide documentary evidence that she paid, 
settled, or resolved any of the debts alleged in the SOR.9 
 
                                                          
4 Item 2. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 Items 2, 3, and 6. 
 
7 Items 2, 6; AE A. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Item 2; AE A.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,277 that are unpaid 
or unresolved. Her debts started to become delinquent in approximately 2010. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence to show she has paid, settled, resolved, or 
has payment plans with any of the alleged creditors. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her failure to timely address 
the delinquent debts casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated her financial problems are attributed to being a single mother 
and taking a lower paying job in May 2015. She divorced in 2011. Her divorce and being 
a single parent were beyond her control. Voluntarily taking a lower paying job was within 
her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant did not provide evidence of actions to address her 
delinquent debts, even some of the small debts (SOR ¶ 1.j - $35; SOR ¶ 1.f - $93; SOR 
¶ 1.e - $99). She indicated she was unaware of the debts, but she stated that she used 
her credit report to list the debts on her SCA in June 2014. Since that time she failed to 
document steps taken to address the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply because there is no evidence she has participated in financial 
counseling or that her financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply because there is no evidence Applicant made a good-faith effort to 
pay any of the delinquent debts, even those she acknowledges belong to her. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply because Applicant did not provide evidence of actions she has 
taken to dispute the debts or resolve the issues. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. She served in the military and received an honorable 
discharge. She indicated she was unaware she had delinquent debts until she obtained 
a credit report to complete her SCA in June 2014. Since becoming aware that her credit 
report reflected numerous delinquent debts, she has not taken action to resolve any of 
them, even those she admitted she owes. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence 
to show her financial situation is stable and she has a realistic plan for paying her 
delinquent creditors. Applicant failed to establish a track record in addressing her 
financial obligations. She failed to meet her burden of persuasion. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
