 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              1 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-02211 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges he failed to file and pay his state 
and federal tax debts for tax year 2011. In March 2013, he filed his state tax return. He 
received a refund after filing his 2011 state tax return. The Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) wrote in a tax transcript that in May 2013, he filed his federal income tax return, 
and he enclosed a payment of $262. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On January 15, 2013, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On September 
30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF made a preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              2 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
On October 30, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he waived his right 
to a hearing. (Item 2) On December 9, 2015, Department Counsel completed the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM). On December 16, 2015, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant provided an undated response to the FORM. Applicant did not object to the 
Government’s evidence. On January 20, 2016, Department Counsel stated she had no 
objection to the Applicant’s FORM response. On February 17, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits. (Items 1-5)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he said he filed his 2011 state and federal taxes in 
2013. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old security officer, who has been employed by the same 
company since 2010.2 He is seeking a security clearance. In 2002, he received a high 
school diploma, and he briefly attended college. In 2003, he joined the Army. After basic 
Army training, he went into the Army Reserve. From January 2006 to May 2007, he was 
on active duty, and he was deployed outside the United States. From May 2007 to May 
2009, he was on active duty in the Army. From June 2009 to present, he served in the 
Army Reserve. He is a sergeant. He has never been married, and he does not have any 
children. There is no evidence of any security violations, alcohol abuse, or use of illegal 
drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 When Applicant completed his January 15, 2013 SF 86, he disclosed that he had 
not filed his 2011 federal and state income tax returns. (Item 2) He said he intended to 
file the returns, and pay any taxes due in February 2013. (Item 2) He did not disclose 
any other financial delinquencies, and his credit reports show all accounts as either paid 
or “pays as agreed.” (Items 3, 4) There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
 
 In his SOR response, Applicant explained that he filed and paid his 2011 state 
and federal income taxes late because of erroneous advice he received from a friend, 
who suggested he file his 2011 and 2012 state and federal income taxes at the same 
time. He did not provide any supporting documentation. The FORM emphasized the 
absence of supporting documentation to corroborate payment of his taxes. (FORM at 3) 
 
In his FORM response, Applicant provided a 2011 state income tax return 
indicating he overpaid his state income taxes by $752. He requested application of his 
2011 tax refund to any state tax due for 2012.  
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s January 15, 2013 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              3 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
In his FORM response, Applicant also provided an IRS account transcript for tax 
year 2011. It showed that the IRS received his 2011 federal income tax return on April 
8, 2013, and he enclosed a payment of $262. The IRS recalculated his 2011 taxes, and 
on April 7, 2014, the IRS paid Applicant $167 as a refund for his overpayment. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              4 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides one disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(g) reads, “failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required . . . .” Applicant’s failure to timely file and 
pay his 2011 federal and state income taxes is documented in his SF 86, SOR 
response, and FORM response. He did not file and pay his taxes “as required,” and he 
owed a small debt to the federal government that was not timely paid. The Government 
established the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(g), requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              5 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant filed and paid his 2011 federal and 
state taxes in 2013, which was late. He realized he made a mistake, and he promised 
that it will not recur. He filed his 2011 tax returns before receiving the SOR. Applicant 
did not reveal any conditions largely beyond his control that caused him not to timely file 
his tax returns, and he did not describe any financial counseling. Applicant’s current 
credit reports show no past due or currently negative accounts. His failure to timely file 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              6 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
his 2011 federal and state tax returns “occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” His finances are under control. His actions show 
sufficient effort, good judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
The rationale for approving Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than the 
reasons for denying his clearance. Applicant is a 32-year-old security officer, who has 
been employed by the same company since 2010. From 2003 to present, he served in 
the Army, mostly in the Army Reserve. He was deployed overseas for 15 months.  
There is no evidence of any security violations, alcohol abuse, use of illegal drugs, or 
criminal conduct. 
 
 Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. All of his debts are in 
current status. He filed and paid his 2011 federal and state taxes in 2013, which was 
late, raising some security and judgment concerns. He realized he made a mistake; he 
took corrective action; and he assured that it will not recur. He understands that he 
needs to pay his debts, including his taxes, and the conduct required to retain his 
security clearance. His efforts at debt resolution as shown in his credit reports have 
established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). I am confident he will maintain his financial 
responsibility. 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              7 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
