 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02393 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his past-due debt. He 
repeatedly claimed that he either paid or was in the process of paying the debt. Despite 
being provided multiple opportunities to provide documentation to support his claims, he 
failed to do so. Accordingly, security concerns raised by his past-due debt remain. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline.1 On July 17, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR 
(Answer). He initially elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
On January 11, 2016, Applicant requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for 
classified information. Without objection, I granted his belated request and scheduled 
his hearing for February 2, 2016.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1 – 5. Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits A – C. I granted his request for additional time post-hearing to submit 
documentation. He timely submitted Exhibit (Ex.) D, an e-mail dated February 8, 2016. 
All exhibits were admitted into the record without objection.3 The transcript (Tr.) was 
received and the record closed on February 8, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a high school graduate with two years of college. He started working 
for his employer over 20 years ago as a security guard. He worked his way up to his 
present position as president of the company. He is highly regarded by his employer 
who supports his request for a security clearance. (Ex. A) His current “annual 
compensation is in excess of $200,000 per year.” (Answer) Although Applicant 
previously received unescorted access to secure facilities, this is his first application for 
a security clearance. He submitted a security clearance application (SCA or application) 
in May 2014.  
 
Applicant is married, but has been legally separated from his wife since 2001 or 
2002. (Tr. at 24, 35)4 In June 2014, Applicant was interviewed as part of his security 
clearance background investigation. He told the background investigator that many 
people are unaware he is married. He also told the investigator that he has a girlfriend. 
His wife is unaware of his girlfriend, but his co-workers have all met her. (Ex. 3 at 3) He 
travels frequently for his job and “maintains residences in other cities to accommodate 
his work and travel schedule.” (Ex. 3 at 1-2) 
 
 Applicant listed only one delinquent debt on his SCA. A delinquent $4,000 credit 
card that he paid after the debt was turned over to a collection agency in 2010. 
Applicant stated on his application that the debt was caused by “financial difficulties with 
spouse.” (Ex. 2 at 35) He explained during his background interview that his wife did not 
pay the account, let bills “stack up”, and he was unaware of the debt until it went to 
collection. He told the background investigator that he paid the debt after he received 
notice of the delinquent debt from the collection company. (Ex. 3 at 5)  
 
After discussing the above debt with the investigator, Applicant was asked about 
two delinquent credit card accounts reflected on his 2014 credit report, Ex. 5. The two 
debts are owed to the same creditor and total approximately $10,000. They are the 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibits I – IV (correspondence and administrative documents). 
 
3 Additionally, the file of relevant material (FORM) that Department Counsel prepared and sent to 
Applicant on September 18, 2015, was marked Hx. V and made a part of the record. 
 
4 But see, SCA, Ex. 2 at 17 (does not disclose separation). 
 
3 
 
 
debts listed on the SOR. Applicant told the background investigator he was unaware of 
the debts, but would look into them and resolve them. (Ex. 3 at 5)  
 
Over a year after the background interview, Applicant admitted both SOR debts 
in his Answer. Applicant signed the Answer after swearing to its contents truth “before a 
person authorized by law to administer oaths.” In his Answer, Applicant states: 
 
(1) A “known family member” incurred the two credit card debts without 
his permission. 
 
(2) The creditor for the $8,500 past-due credit card debt referenced in 
SOR 1.a secured a judgment against him in June 2015.  
 
(3) He entered into a payment plan with the judgment creditor and would 
fully pay the debt “on or before September 1, 2015 in accordance 
with the court decision.” (Answer) 
 
Applicant submitted no documentation with his Answer or in response to the File 
of Relevant Material that was sent to him in September 2015, to corroborate his claims 
of having resolved the judgment. 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that his wife had fraudulently reactivated one of his 
credit cards and created the debt that eventually resulted in the judgment. He also 
testified that he has taken action to sever financial ties with his wife in order to prevent 
this situation from reoccurring. He now disputes the debt referenced in SOR 1.b. He 
submitted no documentation to substantiate the basis of his dispute, but notes the debt 
is no longer listed on his 2015 credit report, Ex. 4. 
 
Applicant testified that he has repeatedly demanded from the creditor a list of the 
charges for the past-due credit card debt listed in SOR 1.a, but has never received it. 
He admits he did not pay the judgment as promised in his Answer. He claims that his 
attorney had an agreement with the creditor to pay the judgment after receiving a list of 
the charges. He provided no documentation to corroborate his claim of such an 
agreement (or, the legal basis upon which he could continue to refuse to pay a final 
judgment). When he did not receive the “backup documentation” from the creditor, he 
did not pay the judgment. (Tr. at 30) 
 
On January 27, 2016, Applicant received a settlement offer from the judgment 
creditor. The creditor agreed to settle the $8,700 judgment for $5,000. Applicant testified 
that, as of the hearing, he had nearly $50,000 in his banking account. He promised to 
pay the debt per the terms of the settlement offer by the close of the record. He 
submitted an e-mail claiming that he paid the debt via a $5,000 cashier’s check that was 
sent to the creditor by overnight mail. He did not provide a copy of the check, nor any 
other documentation to corroborate his current claim of having resolved the debt. (Tr. at 
27-36; Ex. C – D) He was repeatedly advised over the course of the security clearance 
 
4 
 
 
process of the need to provide supporting documentation, including documentation to 
corroborate his claims of debt resolution.5  
 
 Applicant’s efforts in resolving the judgment debt was summarized in the 
following exchange with Department Counsel at hearing: 
 
Department Counsel: Okay. And to date, have you made any payment 
towards that settlement offer? 
 
Applicant: No. 
 
Department Counsel: So just -- 
 
Applicant: No. 
 
Department Counsel:  –- so we’re clear: You’re confronted about this 
specific account in June of 2014 during your investigation. A year later, 
you have a judgment entered against you in court, after losing the case 
where you were disputing that account with [the creditor], and now some 
seven, almost eight months later, there’s still no payment that’s been 
made on that account. Is that correct?  
 
Applicant: That is correct. 
 
(Tr. at 29-30) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
                                                          
5 See, e.g., Hx. II (Applicant was informed that he could submit “Documentation to support your claim as 
to each debt alleged in the SOR (e.g., that you have paid, are paying down, settled, or have a good-faith 
basis to dispute the alleged debt(s), unusual circumstances causing debt or hindering your ability to repay 
the debt, etc.). As you bear the burden of establishing your eligibility for access to classified 
information, you are expected to submit documentation to substantiate any claim of debt 
resolution, reasonable basis to dispute an alleged debt, and any other claim of mitigation or 
refuting the alleged debt(s).”) (emphasis in original). See also, Hx. V, FORM at 3 (“Absent compelling 
documentation that Applicant has made financial arrangements and carried them out to meet his past due 
financial obligations,” he has failed to meet his burden.).  
 
5 
 
 
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
The financial considerations security concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
 
6 
 
 
to satisfy his or her debts. The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, 
which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, 
negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.6 
 
The record evidence, which includes Applicant’s admissions in his Answer and 
the credit reports (Ex. 4 and 5), establish by substantial evidence that he incurred 
approximately $10,000 in debt that has been past due for some time.7 This record 
evidence is sufficient to raise the financial considerations security concern. It also 
establishes the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts, and 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The financial considerations guideline also lists a number of mitigating 
conditions. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and the following warrant 
additional discussion:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 14-03910 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2015) (“A credit report itself is often sufficient to meet 
the Government’s burden of producing evidence of security concern.”) See also, ISCR Case No. 14-
03910 at 2 (App. Bd. June 24, 2015) (“it is well settled that adverse information from a credit report” will 
generally shift the burden to an applicant “to either establish that [they are] not responsible for the debt or 
that [other] matters in mitigation apply.”); ISCR Case No. 05-02422 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2007) (Defining 
substantial evidence standard as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”).  
 
7 
 
 
 Assuming arguendo that the SOR debts were the result of matters beyond 
Applicant’s control and the debt referenced in SOR 1.b was incorrectly reported on his 
past credit report, Applicant failed to establish that he has acted responsibly in 
addressing the past-due debt listed in SOR 1.a.8 His initial action to determine the 
accuracy of the debt and whether he was liable for the debt was reasonable. However, 
after a court found him liable for the debt, Applicant’s continued refusal to satisfy the 
judgment, despite having the apparent means to pay it, raises a serious security 
concern that he may be unwilling to follow rules and regulations – a pertinent character 
trait required of those granted access to classified information. ISCR Case No. 13-
00311 (Jan. 24, 2014) (“In a Guideline F case, a Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
financial condition for what it may reveal about the applicant’s self-control, judgment, 
and other pertinent qualities.”) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant submitted a sworn statement (i.e., Answer) during the 
course of the present security clearance process claiming that he had agreed to a 
payment plan with the creditor to resolve the judgment. Six months after submitting his 
Answer, Applicant admitted during his hearing testimony that he had still not complied 
with the court order to satisfy the judgment and made no payments towards the 
judgment’s resolution. His failure to follow through with his promise raises questions 
about his reliability and trustworthiness – other essential character traits required of 
clearance holders.  
  
 Applicant has been aware of the SOR debts since his 2014 background 
interview. He repeatedly promised during the security clearance process to resolve his 
delinquent debt. As already noted, he provided a sworn statement claiming that he had 
agreed to a payment plan to resolve the judgment as required by court order and 
promised to have it satisfied by September 2015. He did not satisfy the judgment as 
promised and, even after being provided additional time post-hearing, failed to provide 
corroborating documentation of satisfying the judgment. In light of this record, I have 
afforded Applicant’s post-hearing statement that he resolved the judgment little weight. 
As of the close of the record, Applicant’s delinquent debt and the security concerns 
raised by his past-due debt remain.9 AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
8 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00786 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2014) (notwithstanding that past-due debts were 
the result of wife’s fraudulent acts, applicant failed to show responsible action in addressing the debt and 
mitigating concerns raised by his financial situation).  
 
9 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05366 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2016) (adverse decision upheld because 
applicant failed to provide corroborating documentation of his efforts to address the single debt alleged in 
the SOR, a debt with a past-due balance of a little over $10,000).  
 
8 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. 
I gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s work history and strong character reference. Applicant’s life story 
of working his way up from a security guard to president of his company is compelling 
and would seem to indicate that he holds the pertinent qualities sought in those granted 
access to this nation’s secrets. He also made a favorable impression at hearing and, by 
all accounts, appeared to understand the security concerns at issue. He again promised 
to present documentation to corroborate his testimony and would (belatedly) address 
the past-due debt at issue. Yet, once again, he failed to do so. After weighing all the 
evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns raised by his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with doubts about his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
