1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00458
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: William Savarino, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns
arising under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
(DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on November 12, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 11,
2015. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 - 3 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-G, which were admitted without objection. The transcript was received
on December 22, 2015.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Procedural Issue
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
regarding Colombia. Applicant did not object, and the documents proffered in support of
the request were labeled Hearing Exhibit I and entered into the record.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline C and under Guideline B with explanations. 
Applicant was born in Colombia in 1985. He received his undergraduate degree
from a university in Colombia. In 2009, he came to the United States. He became a
naturalized citizen in 2010. He studied at an American community college for a time. He
is married to a Colombian citizen, who is a permanent resident, and lives with him in the
United States. He completed a security clearance application in 2014. He is a software
developer with his employer. (GX 1)
FOREIGN PREFERENCE
The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant possesses a current
Colombian passport that was issued on November 11, 2008 and expires on November
13, 2018. It further alleges that he used the Colombian passport on two separate
occasions between May and December 2011, after having become a naturalized citizen
in 2010.
Applicant possesses a U.S. passport which was issued in 2010. He also had his
Colombian passport when he came to the United States. When he traveled to Colombia
in May and December of 2011, he used his Colombian passport. (Tr. 49) The purpose
of the two trips was to see the woman who would become his wife and his family. At the
time, he had both passports. He stated that he presented both to the Immigration
Officer and was told that he only needed the Colombian passport. (Tr.50). At the time,
he did not have a security clearance or a pending application for a security clearance.
He had no idea that using the foreign passport could be a significant issue at a later
time. After receiving the SOR, Applicant was advised that he should destroy his
Colombian passport. Applicant has now surrendered his Colombian passport to the
Facility Security Officer (FSO)  
Applicant’s 2014 security clearance application notes that he considered himself
a dual citizen of Colombia and the United States from 2009 to the present. (GX 1)
When asked if he would renounce his Colombian citizenship, he stated that “absolutely”
he would. (Tr. 52) He understands that if he would travel to Colombia, he would need a
Colombian passport. He has no plans to do so. If he wants to see his mother, he would
request that she visit him in the United States. (Tr. 66)
3
FOREIGN INFLUENCE
The SOR alleges under Guideline B (1.a-1.c) that Applicant’s mother, step-father,
and his half-brother are citizens and residents of Colombia. Under SOR 1.d, it alleges
that his spouse is a citizen of Colombia. 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Colombia. She was not married to
Applicant’s biological father. She is now married to Applicant’s stepfather. She works in
her home now. She retired after working for a furniture company. Applicant  provided his
mother with some money to help her remodel her house last year and he believes it was
about $5,000. That was a one-time occurrence. In years past, he gave her about $200
or $300 a month. (Tr. 55) In the past, he called her daily. He has reduced the contact
with his mother. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s stepfather is retired due to an eye injury. (Tr. 57) He never worked for
the Colombian government. He knows nothing about Applicant’s work. Applicant does
not contact him. If he calls his mother and his stepfather answers, he would say hello,
but does not engage in a lengthy or substantial conversation. Applicant’s half brother
has no contact with Applicant. Applicant spoke to him once on the phone. (Tr. 61)
Applicant’s spouse is a permanent resident and plans to apply for U.S. citizenship
as soon as is allowed by law. She married Applicant in 2012 and believes that she can
submit her application for U.S. citizenship next year. (Tr. 45) Her family lives in
Colombia. She has two brothers and two sisters in Colombia. Her parents are deceased.
(Tr. 62) Applicant’s wife does not speak regularly to her siblings. None of them are
involved with the Colombian government. Applicant’s wife may call them once a month.
They have never visited the United States. Neither Applicant or his wife provide any
financial support for them. (Tr. 63)
Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen who lives in the United States. He sponsored
Applicant to come to the United States. Applicant’s father has lived in the United States
since about 1994. He traveled between the United States and Colombia for work. 
Applicant has no ties to the Colombian government. He has not served in the
Colombian military. He has no financial interests in Colombia. He does not maintain
contact with any other relatives in Colombia. Applicant and his wife are in the process of
buying a home.  He earns about $118,000 a year. His wife has two jobs. 
Applicant’s program manager testified that Applicant is a good worker who is
always willing to accept additional responsibility. He is a lead a project member currently
and maintains deadlines that are challenging. He is aware of and observant of rules and
regulations about safeguarding government information. In sum, he is reliable,
dependable, and trustworthy. (Tr. 20-21)
4
Applicant’s Facility Security Officer (FSO) testified that Applicant submitted his
Colombian passport to him, and it was shredded in Applicant’s presence. (Tr. 31) This
occurred in April 2015. 
At the hearing, Applicant stated that he is a team lead for one of the company’s
largest projects. He has been employed with the company for almost two years. (Tr. 48)
He does not discuss his work with his wife or any family members. His wife does not
know anything about the security clearance process. He stated that after his security
trainings and briefing, he learned that one should not discuss anything about his work. 
ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Colombia
Colombia is a constitutional, multiparty republic. Its last presidential election was
considered by observers to be free and fair. There have been significantly fewer
instances of security forces acting independently of civilian control than in past years.
However, impunity and an inefficient justice system subject to intimidation limits
Colombia’s ability to prosecute individuals accused of human rights abuses. The
availability of drug-trafficking revenue often exacerbates corruption.
The United States has long enjoyed favorable relations with Colombia. The
United States provides substantial support to the Colombian government’s counter-
narcotics efforts, and encourages the government’s efforts to strengthen its democratic
institutions in order to promote security, stability, and prosperity in the region. Although
the government’s respect for human rights continues to improve, serious problems
remain, including unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances,
insubordinate military personnel who collaborate with criminal groups, and mistreatment
of detainees. Illegal armed groups and terrorists groups commit the majority of human
rights violations-including political killings and kidnappings, forced disappearances,
torture, and other serious human rights abuses.
Violence by narco-terrorist groups and other criminal elements continues to affect
all parts of the country. Citizens of the United States and other countries continue to be
victims of threats, kidnapping, and other criminal acts. The United States has designated
three Colombian groups - the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the
National Liberation Army (ELN), and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC)
- as foreign terrorist organizations. The U.S. State Department has advised travelers
(U.S. citizens) about the dangers of travel to Colombia, and specifically the potential for
violence by terrorists groups and armed criminal gangs called “BACRIMS” in all parts of
the country. 
Any person born in Colombia may be considered a Colombian citizen, even if
never documented as such, and dual U.S.-Colombian citizens are required to present a
Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
5
     Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare,
or other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
7
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as to
serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in conflict with the national security interest; and
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010. He used his Colombian
passport in 2011 when he visited Colombia. In 2011, when he used his Colombian
passport, he also had a U.S. passport.  AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual
was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated; and
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
In 2015, Applicant surrendered his Colombian passport to his FSO when he
learned that it was an issue for obtaining a security clearance. The passport has been
shredded. Applicant has no intention of traveling to Colombia or renewing his passport.
He is willing to renounce his Colombian citizenship and will obtain guidance from his
FSO. Applicant’s FSO testified at the hearing and confirmed this fact.  At the time of the
2011 travel, Applicant did not have a security clearance or have any reason to believe
use of his Colombian passport raised a security concern. No one advised him that this
could be an issue. AG ¶ 11(b and e) apply. Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns under the foreign preference guideline.
8
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A disqualifying condition
also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Finally, “sharing living
quarters with a person, or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if the relationship
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion”
can be a disqualifying condition. AG ¶ 7(d) 
Applicant’s mother, stepfather, and stepbrother are citizens and residents of
Colombia. Applicant maintains some contact with them. He provided some financial
support for his mother. Applicant’s wife lives with him in the United States. Applicant’s
wife, who is a Colombian citizen, maintains some contact with her siblings. Her parents
are deceased.  Security concerns could arise in connection with the potential that hostile
forces might seek classified information from Applicant by threatening harm or offering
benefits to Applicant or his spouse’s relatives in Colombia.  Based on this evidence, AG
¶¶ 7(a) ,7(b) and 7(d) are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶
7(a), 7(b) and 7(d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of
proving a mitigating condition, and the Government does not have the initial burden of
disproving mitigating conditions.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22,
2005). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
9
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign
country is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Family ties with persons in a foreign country are not, as a matter of law,
automatically disqualifying under Guideline B. However, such ties raise a prima facie
security concern to require an applicant to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation or
mitigation sufficient to meet the applicant’s burden of persuasion that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
applicant. Colombia is a country with strong, and cooperative ties with the United States.
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  Applicant’s mother, stepfather and stepbrother have no connection
to the Colombian government. Colombia is a republic, with strong and cooperative ties
with the United States, especially in the area of counter-narcotics. There is no evidence
that Colombia is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. While
there remains the possibility of terrorist activity it is not of significant magnitude in this
situation to merit denial of Applicant’s security clearance. 
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) can mitigate concerns when “there is no conflict of interest,
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant has loyalties to the United
States. He is married to a Colombian woman who is now a permanent resident of the
United States. She plans to apply for U.S. citizenship next year. He has his profession
here in the United States. He is a naturalized citizen. His father is a U.S. citizen who
lives in the United States. Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is such that he can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Foreign
influence security concerns are mitigated under AG ¶ 8(b)
10
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors. The
factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are noteworthy; and
more substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence
that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or committed any security
violations. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen and is married to a woman who plans to apply
for her U.S. citizenship next year. His father is a U.S. citizen who has lived in the United
States since 1999. His loyalty to the United States is not an issue. There is no evidence
that terrorists or other foreign elements have specifically targeted Applicant or his family
or his spouses’ family.  
A Guideline B decision concerning Colombia must take into consideration the
geopolitical situation and dangers there. See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd.
May 23, 2007). Colombia is a friendly country with the United States; however,
Colombia’s government has to contend with the combined terrorist activities of left-wing
guerillas, and drug cartels. Applicant’s mother, stepfather, and stepbrother live in
Colombia. They are citizens of Colombia. They are potential targets of terrorists who
may attempt to pressure or coerce Applicant by threatening his relatives living in
Colombia. I conclude that the possibility that terrorists in Colombia would coerce him into
providing classified information, or he would provide classified information through
affection for Colombia is minuscule.
Applicant has received praise from his employer concerning his work. He has
received security training and briefings. He has complied with rules and regulations. As
soon as he learned that having his Colombian passport would hinder his ability to secure
a clearance for his work in the United States, he surrendered it to the proper authorities.
11
He is establishing his life in the United States. Applicant’s family has no connection with
the government of Colombia. Considering all the evidence, I conclude Applicant has met
his burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
him a security clearance.
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign preference
concerns and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. The Applicant has carried his
burden. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
