  1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------                            )  ISCR Case No. 15-00165 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding family members and interests in 
India.  Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter signed July 21, 2015, Applicant admitted the allegations with 
explanations and requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 28, 2014, 
2015. On November 19, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice setting the hearing for December 8, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled  
 
The Government offered one exhibit (Ex.), accepted as Ex. 1, and one hearing 
exhibit (HE), accepted as HE-1. The hearing exhibit included a request for 
administrative notice concerning certain facts pertaining to the Republic of India. With 
no objections, I accepted the documents in evidence. Applicant gave testimony, 
  2 
 
introduced a witness, and offered a document, which was accepted into the record as 
Ex. A without objection. She was given until January 4, 2016, to submit any additional 
materials. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on December 16, 2015. 
On January 4, 2016, the Government forwarded to me one document received from 
Applicant on December 31, 2015. It was accepted without objection as Ex. B. and the 
record was closed.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the Republic of India (India). Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most 
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are 
either well known or from Government reports. Various facts pertaining to this nation 
were derived from the offered request and its attachments.  
 
India is a sovereign, secular democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal 
parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 
1.2 billion. Since gaining independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, and 
continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens. The most 
significant human rights problems still existent are prison and security force abuses 
including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape. Authorities infringe on citizens’ privacy 
rights, and corruption exists at all levels of government.  
 
India, along with other countries, has been involved in criminal espionage and 
cases involving violation of U.S. export controls. Cases have involved the illegal export, 
or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including 
technology and equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of 
diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
delivery. Governmental and private entities, including intelligence organizations and 
security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key to 
its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two countries 
are the world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by 
representative government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, 
fighting terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia. 
  
India and the United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. A 
Bilateral Counterterrorism Cooperation Initiative was launched in July 2010. As of 2011, 
the number of terrorist-related deaths had decreased. The State Department’s Anti-
Terrorism Assistance program has conducted scores of training courses for Indian law 
  3 
 
enforcement officials. In 2011, a U.S.-India Homeland Security dialogue was 
established to foster cooperation on various law enforcement issues. As of November 
2012, counter-terrorism cooperation with India was described by the Obama 
administration as a “pillar of the bilateral relationship” between the two countries.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old program manager. She was born in India, where she 
earned a bachelor of engineering degree in 2000. She came to the United States in 
2002, following an internal work transfer. She married in 2003, and later decided to 
become a United States citizen. Tr. 27. The couple now has two children. Applicant has 
been working with federal contactors since 2008. During much of that time, she retained 
a public trust position. Tr. 37. In 2013, she became a naturalized United States citizen 
and received a United States passport. She travels on her United States passport. Tr. 
28. 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of India. He is a retired, private sector, 
construction manager. He has little outside contact with others since his wife died in 
2010. Therefore, Applicant speaks with him several times a week by telephone. She 
would see him when her family would visit and stay with her in-laws, prior to their 
relocation in the United States. Her father knows nothing of Applicant’s work or career. 
Tr. 33. He presently wishes to remain in India. Tr. 21. For cultural reasons, it is a taboo 
in the Indian patriarchal society for parents to stay with a daughter. Tr. 31.  
Consequently, he does not wish to reside with his daughter and her husband. Applicant 
used to send him small sums of money, but no longer does so. She noted that if his 
health becomes a major concern, she will apply for a green card on his behalf to come 
to the United States. Tr. 21.  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are now residents in the United 
States, where they possess green cards and live with Applicant and her family. In about 
2009, Applicant and her husband acquired a residence for her in-laws in India, valued at 
about $90,000. There, Applicant and her family would stay when visiting her in-laws. 
Related to that investment are two bank accounts in India, one is depleted and one has 
a balance of about $2,000. The latter account is reserved for making payments on the 
loan used to acquire the property. Now that Applicant’s in-laws are living in the United 
States permanently and are becoming United States citizens, the family is in the 
process of selling the property and closing the accounts. Tr. 18-19. Her in-laws recently 
returned to India with Applicant’s power of attorney to list and sell the property, then 
close the bank accounts. Ex. B (Property listing). Their intent is to return to the United 
States and give all proceeds to Applicant for reinvestment in this country. Tr. 19.  These 
are Applicant’s only remaining interests in India. She has no inheritance rights through 
her father. Tr. 36. 
 
With her family and life now settled in the United States, Applicant has few 
notable contacts remaining in India. The handful of acquaintances and friends she 
retains of Indian nationality either work and live in the United States, or are people she 
makes occasional comments to through social media. Tr. 34. Some work or worked for 
India-based information technology companies. Applicant does not follow their careers. 
  4 
 
 
Here in the United States, Applicant and her husband have two homes. The 
townhouse was purchased in 2004 and is valued at about $460,000. A single family 
dwelling acquired more recently is valued at about $700,000. The homes were 
purchased with 20% down. The couple is timely on their mortgages. Tr. 23. They have 
around $400,000 of equity in the properties. The couple’s joint annual income is about 
$300,000. Tr. 39. Combined, they have over $400,000 in United States savings and 
retirement plan balances.  
 
The couple’s children are aged 10 and 4. Both attend a public school. Applicant 
is active within her community, working for children’s groups and at homeless shelters. 
Tr. 24. The family regularly attends a local house of faith and annually celebrates the 
Fourth of July holiday. Applicant votes in each election. Her husband is a senior 
program manager. They have three automobiles, only one of which is subject to a loan.  
It is the couple’s intent to remain in the United States permanently and to continue 
following Applicant’s “American dream.” Tr. 26; Ex. A (Letter).      
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
  5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has ties of affection, independently or through her husband, for her 
father and in-laws. She owns a $90,000 property in India and maintains two bank 
accounts there. Given these facts, disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (e) 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  6 
 
In finding disqualifying conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) 
requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise 
a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist activities have transpired 
within India. This fact is sufficient to find a heightened risk exists in this case. In 
addition, foreign family ties can pose a security risk even without a connection to a 
foreign government. This is because an applicant may be subject to coercion or undue 
influence when a third party pressures or threatens an applicant’s family members. 
Under these facts, while unlikely, third party coercion concern potentially exists in India. 
Therefore, there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, and find the following apply: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties to a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
Here, with the move of Applicant’s in-laws to the United States, where they now 
hold green cards and reside with Applicant and her family, only Applicant’s father poses 
genuine security concern. He, however, has no nexus to a foreign government or 
military, or know much about Applicant’s work or personal activities. He worked in the 
private sector. With these factors in mind, the nature of the foreign country must be 
considered in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. The United States and India have 
a long-standing, stable relationship, and share common strategic goals. India is a 
democracy and a partner in combating terrorism. There is no evidence it coerces its 
citizens in order to manipulate foreign kin. Given the individual involved and the nature 
of the country at issue, it is unlikely that India would exploit Applicant or her father 
  7 
 
based on their relationship. It is also unlikely that Applicant would have to choose 
between the interests of her aged father in India and the interests of the United States. 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
Moreover, Applicant has developed strong ties to the United States, which weigh 
in her favor when evaluating the question of exploitation or potential conflicts of interest 
based on ties to India. She has lived in the United States for nearly 15 years. This is 
where she started her career, married, chose to make her new home, had two children, 
and became an active part of her local society. She has relatively extensive financial 
investments here. She has no intention to return to India to live. She is already building 
toward a future for his family and a retirement in the United States. In short, the 
passage of time has weakened Applicant’s links to India in favor of strengthening her 
ties in the United States. Telephone calls and occasional trips to India to see her father 
have taken a clear second place to Applicant’s day-to-day professional and family life 
here. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s relationship abroad with her 
father is so deep and longstanding as to outweigh these factors. I conclude that 
Applicant would choose her more significant U.S. ties over her foreign connection, in the 
event a conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Finally, Applicant is in the process of listing and selling her property interest in 
India, thus reducing, if not eliminating, its significance as a foreign influence. What 
remains are two bank accounts, one which is depleted and one with a small balance 
held to facilitate matters associated with the property. Such a minimal balance of this 
nature is insufficient to sustain security concerns. Consequently, AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under the above guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old program manager who was born in India. She earned 
a bachelor of engineering degree in 2000 and accepted a work transfer to the United 
States in 2002. She married and decided to make the United States her permanent 
home. She and her husband are now settled with two children. Working for federal 
contractors since 2008, she has maintained a public trust position without adverse 
incident. Over the years, she became an active member of her community and began 
building for her family’s financial future. In 2013, she became a naturalized United 
  8 
 
States citizen and received a United States passport. It is her intent to raise her children 
in the United States and to retire with her husband in this country.  
 
In contrast, Applicant’s aged father remains in India. She would have him come 
to her, but it is taboo within his culture for a parent to be supported by a daughter.  The 
father lives a quiet life. He is retired from private company employment and is self-
sufficient. At present, Applicant is actively trying to dispose of a $90,000 property she 
and her husband bought for her in-laws’ enjoyment. She is also disposing of a depleted 
bank account and another account with a nominal balance that has been maintained for 
expenses related to the property. Meanwhile, her in-laws have received green cards 
from the United States government and live full-time with Applicant and her husband.  
Overall, Applicant and her family are enjoying her American dream and are settled in 
the United States with considerable domestic holdings. Applicant’s loyalties are clearly 
stacked in favor of her family and life in the United States.  
 
When disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden is placed on an applicant to 
proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. Here, Applicant 
presented sufficient information about herself, her family, her foreign holdings, and the 
country at issue to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
