 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00170 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The 13 charged-off or collection 
accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling more than $32,000, have 
been discharged in bankruptcy. The financial considerations, sexual behavior, and 
personal conduct security concerns have been resolved. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 27, 
2014, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. On April 30, 2014, an 
amended SOR was issued listing sexual behavior and personal conduct security 
concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On March 21, 2013 and May 
19, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On June 12, 2014, I 
was assigned the case. On September 4, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on September 
18, 2014 and held by video teleconference. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, without objection. Applicant testified at 
the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. Additional material (Ex. F and Ex. G) was submitted and admitted into the 
record without objection. On September 29, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the delinquent accounts listed in 
SOR 1.a through SOR 1.n and also SOR 1.p. Department Counsel withdrew the 
allegation in SOR 1.o. (Tr. 19) Applicant admitted engaging in sexual activity in front of 
a web-camera, but denied doing so for compensation. He denied the personal conduct 
security allegation. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old electronic technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2012, and seeks a security clearance. (Ex. 1, Tr. 25) He earns 
$22 per hour. (Tr. 2) Applicant was on active duty with the U.S. Air Force from October 
2002 through December 2008 and then in the Air Force reserves from 2008 through 
2010. In December 2008, when he honorably separated from the Air Force, he was a 
staff sergeant (E-5). (Tr. 26) He obtained a job in February 2009. (Tr. 44)  
 
Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant is a very 
punctual, respectful, responsible, trustworthy, and reliable person with strong 
convictions. (SOR Answer) He exercises good judgment and common sense. He is very 
professional, meticulous in following the rules, and dependable. (Ex. F) He is dedicated 
to the mission and a very productive team member. (Ex. G)  
 
Applicant and his wife, now ex-wife, were both on active duty in the Air Force. 
(Tr. 27) When he and his wife left the service they returned to their home state on the 
east coast. Applicant later moved to the southwest where his wife and children joined 
him for various periods of time. (Tr. 35) His wife and children returned to the east coast 
and then moved back to the southwest in a reconciliation attempt, which was 
unsuccessful. (Tr. 35) A $672 payday loan (SOR 1.d), now in collection, was incurred to 
pay for the family members’ trip from the east coast to the southwest. (Tr. 37)  
 
 From January 2010 through May 2010 and August 2011 through May 2014, 
Applicant used his G.I. educational benefits to attend school. (Tr. 29) He still attends 
school. He was unemployed from September 2009 through June 2010.2 While 
                                                          
2 For part of a month during this period of unemployment, Applicant worked as a customer service 
representative, but the work interfered with his schooling. (Tr. 30) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
unemployed, he received $393 weekly state unemployment compensation. (Tr. 29) His 
current job pays him $22 per hour. (Tr. 40) 
 
In June 2007, while Applicant and his wife were on active duty, they purchased a 
2007 Ford Fusion for $27,679. (Ex. 5, Tr. 31) His wife had possession of the car on the 
east coast. (Tr. 36) In September 2009, they stopped making the $400 monthly 
payments. (Ex. 2) It was later repossessed resulting in an $8,272 obligation (SOR 1.a). 
A mini-van in his wife’s name was also repossessed. (Tr. 32) During the summer of 
2007, while still on active duty, Applicant used a debt consolidation program for two or 
three months. (Tr. 41, 43)  
 
In 2009, Applicant purchased a 2006 Ford. (Tr. 31) He was working and applied, 
but was not hired by another employer. At that time, he could no longer make his car 
payments and it was repossessed. Following the repossession, he owed $5,934 (SOR 
1.h). He returned to the east coast from the southwest. (Tr. 31) Also in 2006 or 2007, 
Applicant incurred a $300 hospital bill (SOR 1.f), which he believes should have been 
paid by TRICARE, but was not. (38-39) 
 In a November 2012 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), Applicant was asked 
about a $4,251 delinquent child support obligation. (Ex. 2) He was divorced in May 
2011. (Ex. 1, Tr. 44) For almost two years starting in 2010, he had failed to pay child 
support for his children ages seven and ten due to a lack of income. (Ex. 2) His last two 
state unemployment checks were intercepted to be applied to his child support 
obligation. (Tr. 47) Starting in July 2012, after obtaining his current employment, he has 
a $233 automatic deduction taken from his pay every two weeks. (Tr. 2, Tr. 46)  
 As of November 2012, as stated in Applicant’s PSI, it was his intention to have all 
delinquent child support paid in 180 days. (Tr. 2) In November 2012, Applicant initiated 
a civil action to gain partial custody of his children. The action has yet to be resolved 
and is now before a mediator. (Tr. 78) His federal income tax refund was intercepted 
and applied to his past-due child support. (Tr. 34) He currently owes $1,063 in past-due 
support. (Tr. 34)  
 Following the 2011 divorce, Applicant’s ex-wife filed for bankruptcy protection. 
(Tr. 43) In November 2013, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief listing $9,530 
in assets and $31,710 in liabilities. (Ex. 3) The debts listed in the bankruptcy were 
discharged on March 10, 2014. (Ex. D) He had tried to file in November 2012 right after 
his PSI, but did not have the $1,500 it would have cost to file. (Tr. 48) Bankruptcy was 
suggested to him during his PSI. (Tr. 49)  
 Applicant’s current monthly income is $2,380 and his monthly expenses are 
$2,260, which leaves a monthly net remainder of $110. The bankruptcy included the 
following SOR debts: SOR 1.a, repossessed 2007 Ford Fusion debt, $8,272; SOR 1.c, 
$44 insurance debt; SOR 1.d, $672 payday loan; SOR 1.e, $415 telephone bill; SOR 
1.f, $300 hospital debt; SOR 1.g, $378 loan; SOR 1.h, repossessed 2006 Ford Mustang 
debt, $5,934; SOR 1.i, $1,934 department store debt; SOR 1.j, $949 department store 
debt; SOR 1.k, $2,251 collection on the same department store account listed in SOR 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
1.i; SOR 1.l, $1,086 telephone bill; and SOR 1.m, and a $199 telephone company 
collection account by the same telephone service provider as SOR 1.l. (Ex. 3)  
 
 Applicants August 2012 credit report (Ex. 4) lists eight accounts including two 
paid automobile accounts, four accounts being paid as agreed, one collection account, 
and one account 120 days late.  
 Applicant lives with and shares living expenses with his girlfriend3 who is a web-
camera model. She makes between $200 and $1,700 per week being active in adult 
content activities on the web. Her pay is 30 percent of what people pay to watch her. 
(Tr. 62, 80) She has one web camera attached to her computer. (Tr.63) She is on the 
web from one to twelve hours per day. (Tr. 65) She can have party sessions, chats, or 
exclusive conversations with individuals wishing to pay. (Tr. 64) During these sessions 
there was sexual talk and sexual adult activities.  
 In August 2010, Applicant sometimes appeared naked and participated in sex 
scenes with her. (Tr. 68) His girlfriend receives compensation for her activities. (Ex. 2) 
Since obtaining his current job, he has not shown his face while participating with her. 
At the time of his PSI, he told the interviewer about his girlfriend’s job and his 
participation with her. He brought his conduct with his girlfriend to the attention of the 
company’s security facility officer (SFO) and asked for guidance on the matter. (Tr. 68) 
The SFO said there was no definitive guidance about the conduct. He was told there 
were no guidelines against Applicant participating in this type of activity. (SOR Answer) 
At that time, he continued to participate without showing his face. After receiving the 
SOR, he stopped all participation. (Tr. 69) After his PSI, he told his supervisors about 
his conduct. (Tr. 71) His parents and closest coworkers know of his conduct as do his 
friends who are also his girlfriend’s friends. (Tr. 74) 
 Applicant pays the $795 monthly rent.4 He owns a 2001 Chevy Blazer and 
makes $322 monthly payments. (Ex. B) He currently owes approximately $3,200 on the 
vehicle. His girlfriend is making the payments on the car because he wanted to trade it 
in, and she wanted to keep it. (Tr. 54) In April 2014, due to mechanical problems with 
the Chevrolet, he purchased a 2012 Ford for $17,633 with $415 monthly payments (Tr. 
52-53) His girlfriend buys the groceries for the household, pays the cable, gas, and 
electric bills. (Tr. 51, 57) He has two credit cards with zero balances and a debit card. 
(Tr. 61) He maintains the credit cards as an emergency fund should the need arise. (Tr. 
95)    
 
 Applicant has had no formal financial counseling, but has learned if he cannot 
pay cash for something, he cannot afford it. (Tr. 82) If he wants something he has to 
save for it. (Tr. 82) Other than the car repossession debts and the child support 
obligation (SOR 1.n, $1,539), the three largest debts were two department store 
                                                          
3 Applicant and his girlfriend had separated for about a year when Applicant was attempting to get back 
together with his ex-wife. (Tr.78) 
 
4 The monthly rent is $995. The other $200 is paid by a roommate not his girlfriend. (Tr. 50) 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
accounts for $2,251 (SOR 1.k) and $949 (SOR 1.j) and a $1,086 telephone bill (SOR 
1.l). He owed approximated $2,000 on six other delinquent obligations. The debts were 
discharged in March 2014 as a result of a bankruptcy proceeding.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
6 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had three vehicle 
repossessions and ten other delinquent accounts, which together totaled more than 
$32,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 While Applicant and his wife were both on active duty in the U.S. Air Force they 
purchased a car and incurred other debts. After leaving active duty, both incurred 
financial difficulties compounded by marital difficulties resulting in divorce. Prior to their 
divorce, they established separate households in different states, which added to their 
financial problems. They divorced in 2011. Shortly thereafter, his ex-wife filed for 
bankruptcy protection. In 2012, it was suggested that Applicant do likewise, but at that 
time he had insufficient funds to proceed with a bankruptcy. In November 2013, he did 
file for bankruptcy protection and in March 2014, his debts, including all of the SOR 
debts, were discharged.5  
 
 Applicant’s debts were incurred a number of years ago, but have only recently 
been discharged. Because he has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems 
continued until discharged in bankruptcy, he receives minimal application of the 
mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
After leaving the Air Force, Applicant did not get the job he anticipated and 
returned to school while living on state unemployment benefits and G.I. educational 
benefits. He is able to address his current obligations and realizes he can only obtain 
those things for which he can pay cash. He does have two credit cards, but maintains 
them only for emergency use. Although he had sufficient funds to meet his current living 
expenses, he had no additional funds to repay the debts earlier incurred. Under the 
circumstances, his choices were limited to non-payment of the debts or bankruptcy. 
 
 In Applicant’s circumstances, the filing of bankruptcy protection was the only 
responsible way to address his debts. Although a legal method of addressing his 
                                                          
5 There is some duplication of debts in Applicant’s bankruptcy schedules. In a bankruptcy filing, most 
debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been resold or transferred to a different 
collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of subsequent dismissal of the 
bankruptcy. If Applicant failed to list some debts on his bankruptcy schedule, this failure to list some debts 
does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority debts 
are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when they are not listed on a 
bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue 
Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr S.D. FL2010), but see First Circuit Bucks Majority on Discharge of 
Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 2009) There is no 
requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & 
Company, Inc. 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a3)(A).  
 
8 
 
 
 
 
delinquent debts, bankruptcy cannot be characterized as a good-faith effort to satisfy his 
debts.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his child 
support obligations. His petition to modify child custody and support is now before a 
mediator. Since obtaining his current job, he has met his support obligation by 
automatic deductions from his pay and has reduced the amount of delinquent support to 
approximately $1,000. Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both separation and 
divorce along with the financial burden associated with each. The job he anticipated 
when he left the Air Force did not materialize. These are factors beyond his control. AG 
& 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20 (c) he has not received any formal financial counseling, but does 
realize he cannot buy on credit. A bankruptcy discharge is meant to give an individual a 
fresh start financially. As of March 2014, Applicant has that fresh start.  
 
Under & 20(d), as previously stated Applicant’s bankruptcy cannot be 
categorized as a “good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors,” but is a legal method to 
“otherwise resolve debts.” AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) have some application.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior:  
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
As related above, the sexual behavior was criminal in nature. AG ¶ 13 describes 
a condition that could raise a security concern in this case and may be disqualifying: 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and,  
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
Applicant’s live-in girlfriend is a web-camera model. She is paid by individuals 
who wish to talk with her and watch her in a variety of sexual, adult conduct activities. 
Applicant participated with her on occasion in front of the web camera. During his PSI, 
he brought his conduct to the attention of the interviewer and asked for guidance. It was 
suggested he talk with his FSO about the matter, which he did. The FSO said there was 
no clear guidance on the matter. Thereafter, on occasion, Applicant continued his 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
involvement with his girlfriend in front of the web camera. Once he received the SOR 
and understood the Government’s concern, he stopped all web-camera participation. 
His parents, friends, coworkers, and supervisors know of his conduct. 
 
AG ¶ 14 provides two conditions that could possible mitigate security concerns. 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
It cannot be said that the conduct was not recent nor infrequent, but “it is unlikely 
to recur.” Applicant did not try to hide his actions. His parents, friends, coworkers, and 
supervisors are aware of his actions. The behavior can no longer serve as a basis for 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. Not knowing how the conduct would be viewed, 
Applicant asked for guidance. He was told there was no clear-cut information about the 
conduct and so he occasionally continued the conduct with his girlfriend. Once he 
received the SOR and knew of the Government’s concern he stopped all such conduct. 
The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 14(b) and AG ¶ 14(c) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern under this guideline is as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern in this case 
and may be disqualifying:  
(e ) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing,  
 AG ¶ 17 provides condition that could possibly mitigate security concern: 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not involve a lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. As stated above, Applicant did not 
know how this type of conduct would be considered by the Government and sought 
advice and was told there was no guideline against this type of conduct. This might 
have been bad advice from the SFO, but Applicant was justified in relying on what the 
SFO told him. When he received the SOR, he knew the conduct was not acceptable 
and he terminated the conduct. He complied once made aware of the Government’s 
concern. His parents, friends, coworkers, and supervisors know of his conduct, which 
acts to reduced or eliminated vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. The 
mitigating condition in AG ¶ 17(e) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
types that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries. The majority were incurred when both Applicant and his now 
ex-wife were on active duty in the Air Force. After they left active duty, they experienced 
financial problems due in part to establishing two separate household many states 
apart. Their financial problems were increased by the separation and later divorce. 
 
Unable to secure the job Applicant hoped to obtain, he returned to school living 
on G.I. educational benefits and state unemployment compensation. Unable to pay the 
debts mainly incurred when he and his wife were a couple, both he and his ex-wife 
sought bankruptcy protection. He now has a fresh start and is able to meet his current 
financial obligations. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—they were not paid but 
discharged in bankruptcy—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).) It is noted the 
discharge of the debts is a recent event. Applicant’s income and expenses have 
remained fairly constant. In April 2014, his monthly vehicle payments increased by $415 
when he purchased a two-year old car. But his vehicle payments decreased by $322, 
when his girlfriend agreed to take over the payments because she wished to keep the 
vehicle and not trade it in on the new vehicle.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend appears to be stable. The only time 
they have been apart in the last few years was the time when he was attempting to 
reconcile with his ex-wife. He is not living beyond his means and is meeting his monthly 
living expenses. He maintains two credit cards with zero balances as an emergency 
fund should the need arise and realizes that he must pay cash for anything he wants.  
 
Applicant and his live-in girlfriend were involved in adult sexual conduct on the 
web. When notified that this was inappropriate, Applicant discontinued the conduct. He 
had earlier sought guidance and was told there was no guideline against such conduct. 
Relying on this advice from an authorized person with his company he occasionally 
continued the activity until told of the Government’s concern, at which point he stopped 
all further such activity. His conduct cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations, sexual 
behavior, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - n:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Sexual Behavior:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
