                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-05357
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Aileen Xenakis, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding foreign influence and personal
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.    
 
History of Case
On October 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superseded and replaced the September
2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs).  They apply to all covered individuals who require
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a
sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor personnel
continue to be governed by DoD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive
changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in effect for 
the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2016, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to another judge on November 9, 2017, and reassigned
to me on November 21, 2017. The case was scheduled for hearing on December 15,
2017. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering whether
it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine 
exhibits (GEs 1-9). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 11 exhibits (AEs A-K).
All exhibits of the parties were admitted without objection. The transcript (R.T.) was
received on December 28, 2017.
Besides its nine exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of facts
covered by 11 source documents, which are identified attached to the Government’s
administrative notice request.
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 12, 2006). Administrative notice is
appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well known. See Stein,
Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). The Government’s administrative
notice request with attached source documents was admitted as HE 1.
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the 
source documents attached to the Administrative Notice (Administrative Notice I through
XI) addressing the geopolitical situation and security concerns extant in the Peoples
Republic of China (China). Administrative notice was extended to the source documents
themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Fed. R. Evid. 201. This notice did not
foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information
contained in the reports addressing China’s current status, or from relying on additional
information in the documents not covered in the Government’s Administrative Notice.  
                                                                                                           
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly (a) has a spouse who is a citizen of China; 
(b) failed to report, as required, his association with a Chinese national and his
subsequent marriage to the national to his employer; (c) has a spouse who regularly
communicates with various companies in China on a regular basis; (d) has a mother-in-
law, sister-in-law, and brother-in-law who are citizens and residents of China; (e) has in-
laws who loaned him and his spouse approximately $5,000 to purchase business
products in China, and to ship those products from China to the United States; and (f)
sought to meet random people during his travels to China, Singapore, Japan, and the
Philippines.
2
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to report his travel to China in
March 2011, August 2011, November 2011, and May 2012; (b) married his current
spouse in March 2012, despite being legally married to another woman (his divorce from
his first spouse was not finalized until on or about June 2013; (c) falsified material facts
during a personal subject interview in November 2012 with an authorized DoD
investigator when he stated he was unaware of the requirement to report foreign travel,
despite being aware of his employer’s reporting requirements set forth in its security
indoctrination briefing, which he signed in November 2011, and as set forth in his
employer’s 2012 DoD Annual Security Refresher; and (d) falsified material facts during a
personal subject interview in September 2013 with an authorized DoD investigator when
he stated he thought the reporting requirement for travel was to report it to his
supervisor, concealing his awareness of the reporting requirements set forth in its
security indoctrination briefing, which he signed in November 2011, and as set forth in
his employer’s 2012 DoD Annual Security Refresher; which he signed in May 2012; and
(e) as alleged in subparagraphs 1.a-1.b and 1.f of Guideline B.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to having a spouse who is citizen
of China, but claimed she is now a naturalized citizen of the United States and no longer
a citizen of China. He admitted to not reporting his association with his wife (a Chinese
national at the time) to his employer’s headquarters in the United States, but claimed  his
relationship with the Chinese national in a country governed by Sharia law was well
known to his supervisor. He claimed, too, that he does not remember any security
briefing from his firm’s headquarters covering reporting requirements. 
Addressing allegations of his wife’s daily contacts with various companies in
China to purchase products for his on-line business, he denied developing anything that
could be construed as an ongoing friendship or business relationship by his wife or
himself. He claimed he and his wife are no longer actively working on this business, and 
Applicant believes they lost more than they earned.  
Applicant admitted his mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and brother-in-law are citizens
and residents of China, while claiming that he has language barriers with his wife’s family
members that prevents him from communicating with them and establishing relationships
with them. 
Applicant also admitted to accepting a $5,000 loan from his Chinese in-laws, but
claimed that the loan was a short-term loan to finance the purchase and shipment of
Chinese products for their business in lieu of using credit cards that were not accepted in
China.  And he admitted to meeting new people in his unaccompanied travels in China.
In his responses to allegations of falsifying facts in his personal subject interview,
Applicant admitted the allegations, but denied any clear understanding of the reporting
requirements for travel contained in his employer’s security indoctrination briefing. He
claimed the reporting processes were either not made clear or were absent altogether,
and he claimed his supervisor and co-workers in his shop knew where he was going.
Implicitly, he denied any deliberate attempts to violate his employer’s reporting
requirements for foreign travel.
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old information technology (IT) systems engineer for a
defense contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR
and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant married his first wife (reportedly a Russian citizen by birth and a
naturalized U.S. citizen), in April 1999 after meeting her on an online web-site and
sponsoring her entry into the United States from Latvia (formerly Russia) in the same
month and year. (GEs 1-2) He separated from her in August 2011, and divorced her in
June 2013. (GEs 1-2, and 6; Tr. 60)  
While still legally married to his first wife, he married his second wife (born and
raised in China) in March 2012 in Kuwait. (AE Tr. 59-60) He met his second wife through
an Asian website in February 2011. (GEs 1-2, 6, and 8; Tr. 49-52) Aware of U.S. laws
banning bigamous marriages and Kuwait laws that preclude a couple from living together
without marriage, Applicant and his second wife converted to the Islamic faith to take
advantage of his host country’s Sharia law, which sanctions male residents taking
multiple wives. (GEs 2, 6, and 9; Tr. 50-51) By all accounts reported by Applicant, his
March 2012 marriage contract with his current wife was consummated in accordance
with Sharia law, witnessed by two friends of his wife from China, and approved as a valid
marriage with the consent of the judge. Before approving the marriage contract, the
presiding judge accepted the declarations of Applicant and his wife as practitioners of the
Islamic faith and determined that their were no legal impediments to the marriage.  (GE
9) 
Neither party in the hearing offered any evidence to dispute the validity of
Applicant’s marriage contract under Kuwait law, and their marriage would likely survive
any legal scrutiny initiated in Kuwait based on Applicant’s bigamous marriage to his first
wife if made known to Kuwait authorities. (GEs 6 and 9) Whether their Kuwait marriage
could ever gain acceptance in State A or any other state in the United States if
challenged for its validity under Kuwait law, or as a marriage that violates state bigamy
laws, is unclear.  
Following their official marriage in Kuwait, Applicant’s current spouse
accompanied him  to the United States in 2013. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen
and received a U.S. passport in April 2015. (GEs 6 and 9 and AEs C-D; Tr. 39-41) 
Applicant and his current wife have one son from their marriage (age three) who was
born in State A in August 2014 and has U.S. citizenship by birth. (AE B; Tr. 42)  Both of
Applicant’s spouses are aware of each other, and Applicant is reportedly on friendly
terms with his first wife. (GE 6)  He currently resides in Kuwait with his most recent
spouse, but listed a potential State A address in his 2014 OPM interview and an actual
State A address in his May 2015 application to vote in State A.  (AE A;  Tr. 33) 
4
Applicant received his high school diploma in 1986 (GE 1; Tr. 31, 42-43) and
attended IT classes in 1994-1995, but did not receive a degree or certification. (GEs 1-2)
He enlisted in the Air Force (AF) in October 1987 and served three years of active duty
on a four-year enlistment before receiving a general discharge for misconduct (sexual
transgressions and violating orders) while on active AF duty in 1990. (GEs 1-2 and 5-6;
Tr. 31-32, 69-70) 
Since July 2013, Applicant has been employed by his current employer (Company
A) at a foreign site. (GEs 1-2 and AE A; Tr. 32) Between July 2008 and June 2013, he
was employed for another contractor (Company B) as an IT systems engineer. (GEs 1-2
and 6; Tr. 39-40) While employed by Company B, he never committed a security
violation and was never disciplined. (GEs 2 and  6)
While Applicant’s spouse’s father is deceased, her mother and sister (and her
husband) are citizens and residents of China. (GEs 1-2 and 6; Tr. 66-68) Applicant’s
current wife maintains close relationships with her mother and sister. (GEs 1-2 and 6; Tr.
68) His mother-in-law is a homemaker who does not speak English and does not know
any specifics about Applicant’s work. (GE 6) While his sister-in-law reportedly owns a
printing business in China, little is known about her or her husband. Due to language
barriers between Applicant and his in-laws, they have had little contact with each other.
(GE 6; Tr. 44) 
Beginning in May 2011, Applicant began paying for English classes for his current
spouse (Tr. 53-54), and continued paying for her English classes through February 2012.
Applicant did not report his then relationship with his current wife to anyone in Iraq while
employed there. (Tr. 54) After arriving in Kuwait in February 2012 and becoming more
familiar with his employer’s reporting requirements, he disclosed his relationship with his
current wife to his immediate supervisor. (Tr. 55-57) Reportedly, his FSO did not learn of
his marriage to his current wife until he reviewed Applicant’s August 2012 e-QIP. (AEs 7-
8) Since completing his e-QIP in September 2012, Applicant has more careful about
familiarizing himself with his employer’s established procedures for reporting foreign
travel. (Tr. 55-57, 71-72) His current plans are to place “his family’s roots down” in the
United States, and not in Kuwait or China. (Tr. 73)
In January 2013, Applicant started an on-line business with his current wife. (GE
2) To help his wife operate the business, Applicant obtained a government identification
number and reseller license in a western state in March 2013. (GE 2) In April 2013, they
began shipping their products from China. (GE 2) Applicant’s initial investment in the
business was around $15,000.
In August 2013, Applicant’s in-laws loaned his spouse and himself approximately
$5,000 to purchase business products in China and ship them to the United States. (GEs
1-2; Tr. 45-46)  Because credit cards are not accepted, cash payments for the products
were required in China. Applicant repaid his in-laws for the loans after receiving the
shipments. (Tr. 45-46) His spouse did not close her China business, though, until 2014
following the birth of their son in August 2014. (Tr. 65-66) Applicant’s commercial
5
activities in China over a period of several years reflect considerable financial ties to his
wife’s China business interests.   
Between March 2011 and May 2012, Applicant made several trips to China with
his spouse to purchase Chinese products for his wife’s business services. (GEs 2 and 6;
Tr. 63-64) In his statements given to investigators from the Office of Personal
Management (OPM) in 2014, he confirmed these trips to China, citing five separate trips.
(GE 2) In March or April 2011, he traveled to China to meet his current wife. (GEs 2 and
6 and AE H; Tr. 53)  
Applicant traveled again to China in August and November of 2011 to meet with
his current wife. (GE 2; Tr. 39) He also reported travels to Hong Kong and Thailand in
April 2011, where he met random people, utilizing an Asian dating website. (GEs 1-2; Tr.
47)  Typically, on his China trips he would see his current wife’s family, and occasionally
family friends. (Tr. 76) Following his marriage to his current wife, he traveled to China in
May 2012 to help her obtain her family visa to return with him to Kuwait. And in March-
April 2013, he traveled to China to join his wife and meet her family. While they were in
China, they picked up their purchases, boxed them, and shipped them to a U.S. on-line
distributor for resale. (GEs 1-2) His most recent trip to China was in August 2017 to visit
his wife’s family, which he reported to his employer. (Tr. 68-69) 
  
China’s country status
While not a country acclaimed to be hostile to U.S. persons and interests, China
maintains a relationship that is more competitive than cooperative. China is known to use
its intelligence services to collect information about the United States and to obtain
advanced technologies. China actively monitors international communications satellites
from maintained intercept facilities, in addition to collecting information on U.S. military
operations and exercises.
Established in 1949, China with over 1.3 billion people is the world’s most
populous country. See The World Factbook: China, Central Intelligence Agency (July
2018). Today, China continues to undergo rapid economic and social change. Political
power, however, remains centralized in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) with little
indication of any change in the foreseeable future. As a corollary of its authoritarian
roots, China has never been known for a positive human rights record among Western
nations and international human rights groups. Part of this can be explained in terms of
China’s lack of any cognizable tradition of respect for developing democracies and the
rule of law.
U.S.-China disputes over Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Tibet can be expected to
continued to undermine improvements in U.S.-China military relations. And, China-
sponsored espionage aimed at U.S. military and economic interests promise to continue
the need for heavy security monitoring over sensitive U.S. industries.
Still, the United States has sought to build positive, cooperative, and
comprehensive relationships with China by expanding areas of cooperation while
6
addressing areas of disagreement in the areas of tariff policies, as well in the fields of
human rights and cybersecurity. See U.S. Relations with China, Fact Sheet, U.S.
Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs at 1-2 (Dec. 2016).
Historically, the United States has emphasized the need to enhance trust in its
bilateral relations with China through increased high-level exchanges, formal dialogues,
and expanded people-to-people ties. (Id.) The U.S. approach to its economic relations
with China has been to integrate China into the global, rules-based economic and trading
system and expanding U.S. exporters’ and investors’ access to the China’s market. (Id.,
at 1-2) How the recent reciprocal rounds of tariffs imposed by the United States
(primarily in steel and aluminum) and China (especially in agricultural products) will
impact short and long term trade between the two countries is still unclear. Negotiations
can hopefully lead to improved trade relations that hold promise for sparing trade wars
between China and the United States.  
China’s collection pursuits
China’s actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of economic
espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information is
expected to continue at a high level and pose a growing and persistent threat to U.S.
economic security. See Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s
Republic of China, U.S. Dep’t of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 2009-2011 at 4
(Oct. 2011) (Military Developments) and Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3.
China’s leaders remain focused on developing the capabilities to deter or defeat
adversary power projection and counter third-party intervention-including by the United
States-during a crisis or conflict. (Id.)   
China uses various methods and strategies to acquire foreign military and dual-
use technologies, including cyber activity and exploitation of the access of Chinese
nationals-such as students or researchers-acting as procurement agents or
intermediaries. See Military Developments 2017, supra, at 71. China very likely uses its
intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. laws and
export controls to obtain key national security and export-restricted technologies,
controlled equipment, and other materials unobtainable through other means. (Id.)
Computer systems around the world, including those owned by the U.S.
Government, continued to be targeted by China-based intrusions through 2016. These
and past intrusions focused on accessing networks and extracting information. See
Military Developments 2017, supra, at 59 and Request for Administrative Notice, supra
at 4. China uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against U.S.
diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial base sectors. The information targeted can
be used to benefit China’s defense high-technology sectors, support China’s military
modernization, or provide the CCP insights into U.S. leadership perspectives. (Id.) 
China uses state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the
level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, development,
and acquisition. See Military Developments 2017, supra, at 65 and Request for
7
Administrative Notice, supra. The organizational network of China’s military-industrial
complex is such that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able “to access sensitive and
dual-use technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and
development.” Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
China, U.S. Dep’t of Defense, Annual Report to Congress at 11-12, 51 (2013) and 
Request for Administrative Notice, supra. 
Numerous examples exist of individuals who have been convicted of conspiring to
violate federal export control laws by illegally exporting defense equipment to China.
Examples include a Chinese national’s pleading guilty in March 2016 to participating in a
conspiracy over an extended period between 2008-2016 to hacking into the networks of
major U.S. defense contractors to steal sensitive military and export-controlled data, and
send the the stolen data to China. See Request for Administrative Notice, supra, at 5.  
In another example, an employee of the U.S. Department of State was charged
with failing to report repeated contacts with Chinese foreign intelligence agents who
provided her and her family with “thousands of dollars of gifts and benefits over five
years.” Press Release, State Department Employee Arrested and Charged with
Concealing Extensive Contacts with Foreign Agents, U.S. Department of Justice, Office
of Public Affairs (March 29, 2017). Other examples of individuals who have been
convicted of conspiring to violate federal export laws by illegally exporting defense
equipment to China are noted and covered in the Request for Administrative Notice,
supra. Noted examples include recent federal convictions covering the illegal exporting
of fighter jet engines and a long-term program involving the development of special
nuclear material outside the United States without the required authorization from the
U.S. Department of Energy (DoE). See id.
Of additional security concern to the United States is the large and growing threat
to its national security from Chinese intelligence collection operations. Particularly
serious are China’s efforts at cyber and human infiltration of U.S. national security
organizations. Reports of Chinese espionage are not of recent vintage but extend back
over the past 15 years. See Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission at 289 (Nov. 2016). 
Threats from Chinese intelligence operations extend overseas and include
China’s growing technical intelligence collections capabilities to monitor deployed U.S.
military forces. Chinese intelligence services have demonstrated broad capabilities to
infiltrate U.S. national security actors with cyber operations. See id, at 293 and Request
for Administrative Notice, supra, at 6.
China’s human rights record
China is an authoritarian state in which the CCP is still the paramount authority.
CCP members hold all top government and security apparatus positions. See 2016
Human Rights Report: China, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy at 1
(March 3, 2017). Human rights concerns observed in 2016 included “illegal detention [in]
unofficial holding facilities known as “black jails,” torture and coerced confessions of
8
prisoners, and detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, writers, bloggers,
dissidents, petitioners, and others whose actions the authorities deemed unacceptable.
See  2016 Human Rights Report: China, supra and Request for Administrative Notice,
supra, at 7.
Of note, China passed a new law, effective January 1, 2017, that confirmed that
non-government organizations (NGOs) are considered a “national security” threat. To
enforce the law, authorities used extralegal measures, such as enforced disappearances
and strict house arrest to prevent public expression of critical opinions. Authorities
continued to censor and tightly control public discourse exchanged on the internet and
through the print and other media. See id, at 2. 
Visitors continue to be warned by the U.S. State Department that they can be
placed under surveillance without knowledge or consent. See Country Information -
China: Local Laws & Special Circumstances, Surveillance and Monitoring, US. Dep’t of
State at 10 (Sept. 2016) and Request for Administrative Notice, supra, at 8. Hotel rooms
and personal computing devices for these categories are sometimes searched by
security personnel. 
Foreign travel reporting
In preparation for his foreign travel trips to China between March 2011 and May
2012, Applicant regularly kept his program supervisor informed of his China travel plans.
(GEs 4 and 6) Following his relocation to Kuwait in December 2011, his principal facility
security officer (FSO) reminded him of his employer’s requirements that all foreign travel
be routed through employer’s regional offices in the United States for official approval.
(GE 8) 
Asked by his FSO in an August 2012 email whether he had been reporting his
foreign travel or recent marriage to security, he indicated he had not and was previously
unaware of foreign travel reporting requirements and only reported his May 2012 foreign
travels to China to his local program manager. (GEs 2, 6 and 8) Thereafter, Applicant
kept his security office properly informed of his foreign travel plans. (GEs 2 and 6) 
In interviews with OPM investigators in November 2012 and September 2013,
Applicant acknowledged his initial failures to report his foreign travels to his employer’s 
FSO located at the employer’s offices in the United States as he was instructed to do in
his employer’s security indoctrination briefing in November 2011 and in the DoD Annual
Security Refresher. Both of these instruments he completed and signed in November
2011 without the benefit of any oral briefings. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 46-47) Applicant assured in
his OPM interview and again at his hearing that he did not recall signing the briefing
documents or being aware of the specific notice requirements contained in these
briefings covering the reporting of foreign travel plans, but consistently briefed his
program supervisor on his travel plans. (GEs 2 and 6 and AEs I-J; Tr. 41-43, 46-48, and 
51) 
9
Applicant explained at hearing that the briefing materials furnished him never
stood out for him and he never fully understood the travel reporting requirements in the
briefing materials. (Tr. 46-48) While the briefing materials he reportedly signed are clear
in their reporting requirements, his actions in bypassing his FSO and keeping his
supervisor informed of his foreign travel plans do not reflect intentional efforts to conceal
his plans from his Company B’s security office. 
Applicant’s explanations, considering all of the circumstances surrounding his
working conditions in Iraq and Kuwait, reflect inadvertent memory lapses of what he
signed and agreed to do when reporting foreign travel plans, but no deliberate bypassing
of his employer’s briefing requirements for reporting foreign travel plans. Whether his
supervisor ever passed along in a timely way Applicant’s reported travel plans to the
company’s FSO is unclear. 
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by colleagues and friends who have known and
worked with him. (AE K) Each of his references had reviewed the allegations in the SOR
and found Applicant to be trustworthy, reliable, and dependable in their personal
dealings with him. (AE K) Their expressed interaction with Applicant covered both work
and social situations. (AE K) None of his references offered any doubt that Applicant
would be susceptible to foreign interests and influence. (AE K) They praised his
contributions and trustworthiness. His performance evaluations for calendar year 2012
credited Applicant with meeting program requirements for organization and execution of
his IT responsibilities. They reflect excellent credits for his work contributions to his
employer. (AEs F-G)
Policies
The AGs for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (effective
September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by administrative judges in the
decision making process covering DOHA cases. These Guidelines require the
administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating
Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be
granted, continued or denied. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
10
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4)
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests, including, but
not limited to, business, financial, and property interests, are
a national security concern if they result in divided allegiance.
They may also be a national security concern if they create
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or
otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest.  Assessment of foreign contacts and interests
should consider the country in which the foreign contact or
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain
protected classified or sensitive information or is associated
with a risk of terrorism.  See AG ¶ 6.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . .,
AG ¶ 15. 
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
11
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case. Based on the requirement of E.O.10865 that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, supra. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  (Id.)
Analysis
Applicant is a U.S. citizen whose current wife immigrated to the United States
from China in 2013.  Security concerns arise over the status of Applicant’s mother-in-law,
sister-in-law, and her husband, who are citizens and residents of China, a country 
historically competitive with the United States in many areas of commerce and trade.
While competing with the United States economically, China also seeks to surpass the
United States in overall military strength. China also has the reputation for being one of
the most aggressive collectors of economic information and technology in the United
States and continues to exhibit a poor human rights record that include reported illegal
detention in unofficial holding facilities known as “black jails,” torture and coerced
confessions of prisoners, and detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, writers,
bloggers, dissidents, petitioners, and others whose actions the authorities deemed
unacceptable.
Additional security concerns are raised over allegations of Applicant’s failure to
comply with his employer’s foreign travel reporting requirements and allegedly falsifying
material facts about his claimed unawareness of his employer’s foreign travel reporting
requirements during a personal subject interview concerning his stated failures to follow
his employer’s formal briefing requirements for seeking foreign travel approvals. Security
concerns are also raised over Applicant’s bigamous marriages.  
12
Foreign influence concerns 
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that the
citizenship/residence of status of Applicant’s mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and her husband
residing in China might be subject to undue foreign influence by Chinese government
authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control. Because
Applicant’s in-laws reside in China, they present potential heightened security risks
covered by disqualifying condition  (DC)  ¶ 7(a) of the AGs for foreign influence: “contact,
regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.”
Little is known about the backgrounds of Applicant’s mother-in-law, sister-in-law,
and her husband. All that is known about these extended family members is that his
mother-in-law is a retired factory worker, his sister-in-law’s husband works in the private
sector, and in the past these family members have provided financial assistance to
Applicant and his wife in their business start-up in China. Nothing material is known about
whether these family members have any associations or ties to Chinese government
officials interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive information in the United States.
Past reported collection activities by Chinese government officials historically have been a
major source of security concern about their exposure to pressure, coercion, or influence
by Chinese officials interested in acquiring sensitive U.S. technology from applicants
Because of the past business relationships Applicant and his current wife have
enjoyed with her family members and friends who have supplied material financial
assistance to their start-up business in China, DC ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information,” has some application to Applicant’s situation. Although Applicant and his wife
have since shuttered their business, they have not completely liquidated it. Prospects for
reopening the business at some future date cannot be completely ruled out at this time.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter. 
Put another way, the AGs do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations
with the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. China
continues to target the United States and its companies for economic and proprietary
information and has a poor human rights record to contend with. 
13
Based on the past business activities Applicant and his current wife have nurtured 
in China with the help of his wife’s in-laws and friends, and his wife’s close relationship 
with her mother and sister, none of the mitigating conditions potentially available to
applicant under Guideline B apply to his situation. 
In evaluating Guideline B cases involving China, the Appeal board historically has
looked to evidence of heightened risks of coercion and pressure associated with the
nature of the foreign government, the Government’s intelligence history, the Government’s
human rights record, the extent to which the foreign government’s interests are adverse to
the United states, and the applicant’s family ties and interests in the foreign country of
interest. See ISCR Case No. 16-02435 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 15, 2018); ISCR Case No.
12-04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013); and ISCR case No. 01-10128 at 3-6 (App. Bd.
Jan. 6, 2005) Each of the factors considered in these Appeal Board decisions involving
China were assessed  in Applicant’s case and produce similar concerns.
Personal conduct concerns
Additional security concerns present over Applicant’s bigamous marriage in Kuwait
to his current wife while still married to his first wife.  While his approved marriage contract
in Kuwait may meet Kuwait marriage requirements sanctioned by Sharia law, questions
remain over whether his Kuwait marriage could ever be accepted in State A or any other
state in the United State that criminalizes bigamous marriages. Applicant’s attempts to
justify his marriage to his current wife with his claims that he and his first wife were
separated during his courtship and eventual marriage to his current wife provide no
meaningful defense to a knowingly contracted for marriage where the first marriage had
not been legally dissolved. 
While state criminal laws governing bigamy vary by state, deliberate inducement of
another to enter into a bigamous marriage contract while he has a living spouse is
potentially criminal under state criminal laws that can vary from state to state but generally
treat bigamy as a major felony that is not defensible as an exercise of religious liberty. See
Reynolds v. United States, 98 U.S. 145 (1878). 
While there are cases where the offending party may be immune from bigamy
charges (such as where the offending party believes his previous marriage is void, or
where the parties have been living apart for a defined number of consecutive years prior to
the ensuing marriage during which time the prior spouse was not known to the offending
spouse to be alive), Applicant’s marriage to his current spouse cannot be reconciled with
either of these exceptions. 
Marriage between a man and a woman (more recently extended by the Supreme
Court to same-sex marriages in Obergefell v. Hodges, 135 S. Ct. (2015))  bestows sacred
matrimonial obligations on the partners that cannot be breached or compromised by either
partner’s consummating a bigamous marriage relationship without exposing the offending
partner to potential civil and criminal consequences. 
14
Afforded opportunities at hearing, Applicant could provide no saving legal
explanation for his entering into a marriage with his current spouse with the knowledge
that he was still in a legal marriage relationship with his first wife. His claims that his
marriage contract with his current spouse was legally consummated and is enforceable
under his host country’s Sharia law is highly unlikely to draw comity acceptance against
any hypothetical bigamy charges waged against Applicant under cover of state bigamy
laws in the United States that criminalize bigamy. Comity principles recognized under our
U.S. system of federalism do not require courts to recognize bigamous marriages
consummated in foreign countries whose laws sanction bigamous marriages that conflict
with marriage laws in force throughout the United States.
To be sure, bigamy prosecutions are rare in the Unites States, and it is unlikely
Applicant would ever have to face criminal prosecution for bigamy were he to eventually
relocate to State A or any other state in the United States.  However, with bigamy laws still
on the books in State A and other states, it remains highly questionable whether any state
in the united States would bless his Kuwait marriage under any appeal to comity.  
Like the trust bonds that are forged in a marriage relationship, Government
approvals of access to classified and sensitive information are based on an applicant’s
demonstrated trust. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980), holding
that the United States must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in
persons granted access to classified information.
In Applicant’s case, his marital breaches warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions of the personal conduct guideline. One disqualifying condition is
DC ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when
combined with all available information, supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This includes, but is not
limited to, consideration of: . . . (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach
of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of
sensitive corporate or government protected information.” Another is DC ¶ 16(e), “personal
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or
group. Such conduct includes: . . . (3) while in another country, engaging in any activity
that while legal there, is illegal in the United States.”
Applicant’s bigamous marriage with his current wife that existed for almost three
years before he finalized his divorce with his first wife in June 2013 betrayed his solemn
commitments to a faithful and trusting partnership with his first wife. While legal in Kuwait
under its laws, his marriage to his current wife violates the civil and criminal laws of State
A and other states in the United States and creates major doubts about whether he can be
trusted to fulfil his fiducial promises to safeguard classified and sensitive information were
to be granted access to classified or sensitive information. None of the mitigating
15
conditions potentially available to Applicant under the personal conduct guideline are
applicable. 
By contrast, Applicant’s failure to report, as required by his employer’s centralized
reporting requirements, his foreign travels to China between March 2011 and May 2012,
and to Hong Kong and Thailand in April 2012, was never accompanied by and intentional
attempts to evade his employer’s foreign travel reporting requirements. Although, he
certainly received his employer’s briefing materials governing foreign travel reporting
requirements, he never internally processed the information sufficiently to familiarize
himself with the central reporting requirements contained in the briefing materials. 
Based on what he thought at the time to be the correct procedures in a country
(Iraq) far removed from the employer’s regional headquarters, he notified his program
supervisor of his foreign travel plans. Nothing in the presented evidence reflects any
disciplinary measures taken against Applicant for not following the correct reporting
procedures, and his own explanations have been accepted as credible ones. Considering
all of the circumstances of Applicant’s failure to utilize proper reporting procedures for
disclosing his foreign travel plans, Applicant’s explanations are accepted and
substantiated. 
Ensuing allegations of his falsifying material facts during his November 2012
personal subject interview are also unsubstantiated. His explanations of being unfamiliar
with the specific foreign travel reporting requirements set forth in the briefing materials that
he signed for in May 2012 reflect some inattention to details and perhaps poor judgment
but not deliberate misstatement of his understandings at the time about his employer’s
foreign travel reporting requirements. 
Pressed by the Government for explanations, Applicant documented his keeping his
supervisor informed of his China travel plans and made a plausible showing that he did not
deliberately ignore his employer’s foreign travel reporting requirements. Applicant’s
explanations are credible enough to avoid conclusions of (a) intentional disregard of his
employer’s foreign travel plans and (b) falsification of material facts during his personal
interview with an authorized DoD investigator.  
Whole-person assessment 
Applicant is credited with considerable contributions to the defense of the nation.
His military service to the Air Force and his years of service to the nation’s defense are
duly noted. His contributions are not enough, though to overcome Government concerns
about his wife’s close relationships with her mother and with her sister and husband who
are citizens and residents of China. Security concerns created by Applicant’s having in-
laws in China and a bigamous marriage conceived from a relationship that blossomed
while Applicant was still married to his wife cannot be surmounted by Applicant’s defense
contributions and commitments to minimize his ties to China.
16
In Applicant’s case, any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to
bear on any of his extended family members by Chinese authorities are considerable.
Trust concerns over Applicant’s links to China through his current wife are compounded 
by the bigamous marriage he engaged in for over 15 months before his divorce from his
first wife was finalized in 2013. Any Applicant consideration to relocate to any of the 50
states in the United States must take into account risks of potential criminal prosecution for
violation of state marriage laws.
Overall, security concerns attributable to Applicant's extended  family members in
China and his bigamous marriage are insufficiently mitigated and preclude safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his
familial relationships in China. His continued exposure to potential criminal complications
stemming from his past bigamous marriage to his current spouse creates additional
concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted
with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B and Guideline E.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
         GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST  APPLICANT
       Subparas. 1.a-1.f:          Against Applicant
        GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST  APPLICANT
       Subpara. 2.b and 2.e:          Against Applicant
       Subparas. 2.a and 2.c-2.d:              For Applicant       
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
17
18
