 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07863 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct), 
however, he was unable to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. On 
August 26, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
On March 20, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me. On April 2, 2018, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for May 7, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C were admitted in evidence 
without objection. I held the record open until June 8, 2018 to afford the Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE D through Q, 
 
2 
 
 
which were admitted in evidence without objection. On May 16, 2018, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.b to change the charged-off 
amount alleged from $10,849 to $20,259 to conform to the evidence. Without 
objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (GE 2; Tr. 99-101) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old field service representative employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2013. He seeks to retain his security clearance as a 
condition of his continued employment. Applicant stated that he has held a security 
clearance since 1979 when he was in the Army. (GE 1; Tr. 13-14, 21-22))  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1978. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in 
1979 and retired as a chief warrant officer 2 in 1999. He began working as a defense 
contractor “[p]robably three years” after retiring from the Army. (GE 1, GE 5; AE D; Tr. 
15, 20-23) Since graduating from high school, Applicant has been awarded an 
associate’s degree in general studies, and bachelor’s and master’s degrees in 
theology. Shortly after his hearing, he received a doctorate degree in religious 
education in May 2018. (GE 1, GE 5; AE L; Tr. 15-19) In addition to his defense 
contractor job, Applicant is a full-time pastor. (Tr. 19) 
 
Applicant married in 1982 and has an 18-year-old daughter in college. His wife 
is employed full-time as a GS-8 secretary at an Army hospital. (GE 1; Tr. 23-26) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR lists 12 allegations under this concern, 10 of which are debts totaling 
$52,630, and 2 of which are charged-off accounts with unknown balances. These 
debts are substantiated in the Government’s exhibits. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l; GE 1 – 5) 
 
Applicant claimed that his financial difficulties began shortly after his retirement 
from the Army in 1999. At that time, he had his Army pension, a 401k retirement 
account, and he had secured a $64,000 a year job with a yacht company. After he 
retired, Applicant and a friend decided to open a Caribbean soul food restaurant near 
a military base. Two days after opening the restaurant, his friend abandoned the 
business leaving Applicant on his own to run and manage the business. Shortly after 
that, the “economy went bad” when “the troops left and went overseas” and Applicant 
lost his job with the yacht company. He used his 401k retirement account and credit 
cards to keep the restaurant financially afloat until he was forced to close it in 2001. 
(GE 1; Tr. 26-30, 35-36)  
 
3 
 
 
A review of Applicant’s May 3, 2014 security clearance application indicates 
that he has had no significant periods of unemployment since retiring from the Army in 
1999. (GE 1) 
 
During his April 30, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI), the investigator discussed Applicant’s SOR credit report and 
debts in detail with him. During that interview, Applicant claimed that he had no 
problems meeting his financial obligations in a timely manner and disagreed with the 
majority of the debts, but as of the date of his July 1, 2016 SOR, he had done little if 
anything to address the debts listed on his credit report. (GE 5)  
 
In Applicant’s August 26, 2016 SOR Answer, he provided documentation 
addressing four of his smaller SOR debts - SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,386 collection account paid 
in full on August 15, 2016); SOR ¶ 1.f ($654 medical collection account settled for 
$392 on August 15, 2016); SOR ¶ 1.h ($121 collection account paid on July 26, 2016); 
and SOR ¶ 1.l (charged-off account for an unknown amount that was current as of 
August 11, 2016). In his SOR answer, Applicant stated he had retained the services of 
a credit repair company, but provided no documentation of same. Also, Applicant 
testified regarding the progress the credit repair company had made, but provided no 
documentation of same at his hearing or in his post-hearing submissions. (SOR 
Answer; AE Q; Tr. 91-95) 
 
Applicant claimed that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($10,849 charged-off account) 
and 1.c ($24,295 collection account) are the same debt for a repossessed automobile. 
However, the evidence does not support that assertion. In 2013, Applicant cosigned 
an automobile loan for a friend, the friend stopped making payments, and the 
automobile was repossessed and auctioned in 2015 leaving Applicant responsible as 
cosigner. The $24,295 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c is the automobile loan. Applicant had 
not resolved this debt as of his hearing date and did not submit any post-hearing 
evidence indicating that this debt was resolved or being resolved. (GE 2; Tr. 29-30, 
32-35, 41-46, 101) 
 
Department Counsel questioned Applicant regarding each of the remaining 
SOR debts. Apart from the four debts that Applicant addressed in his SOR Answer 
and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($97 collection account), he was unable to provide clear and 
convincing evidence that the remaining seven debts were resolved or being resolved. 
After questioning Applicant about his debts, Department Counsel and I reviewed his 
debts a second time with him to ensure that he understood what post-hearing 
documentation was required. (SOR Answer; GE 2; Tr. 37-77) Post-hearing, Applicant 
submitted documentation addressing the debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.l (previously 
submitted in SOR Answer).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a $957 judgment that was settled for $1,200 documented by letter 
dated June 1, 2018. (AE J) 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a $10,849 charged-off account that has a zero balance as 
evidenced by letter dated June 1, 2018. (AE G). Applicant claims AE G addresses the 
debt in 1.j (a $8,483 judgment in 2010 with a different creditor name than the debt in 
1.b) It is unclear from the documentation Applicant submitted that 1.j is the same debt 
as 1.b given the different creditor names, different amounts involved, and that one 
account is a charged-off account and the other is a judgment. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l is a charged-off account for an unknown amount. This debt was 
addressed in the SOR Answer and again addressed in the post-hearing submissions 
by letter from the creditor dated June 5, 2018 showing the loan was paid in full. (AE N) 
 
During his April 2014 OPM PSI, Applicant claimed that he pays all of his bills 
and has no problems meeting his financial obligations in a timely manner. He added 
there are no records or people who would contradict the information he provided. (GE 
5) Post-hearing, Applicant provided pertinent portions from his 2017 federal income 
tax returns to demonstrate that he was making timely payments for taxes owed. His 
adjusted gross income for 2017 was $147,221. (AE B) 
 
 Personal Conduct 
 
  The SOR alleged and Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified his May 
2017 security clearance application when asked whether he ever had a judgment 
entered against him in the past seven years when in fact he had a $957 judgment 
entered against him in March 2012 and a $8,483 judgment entered against him in 
June 2010. Additionally, he was asked whether in the last seven years he had ever 
defaulted on any type of loan, ever had bills turned over to a collection agency, ever 
had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay 
as agreed, or ever been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered 
or was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, which was not true as 
evidenced by the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l. Applicant answered no to 
both questions.  
 
  Applicant testified that he never received any notices regarding judgments nor 
was he aware of his debts. He added that he was overseas and out of touch with his 
mail and credit situation. He also failed to check his credit report when he completed 
his security clearance application which would have alerted him to his negative credit 
history. Applicant acknowledged that his answers were incorrect or that he may have 
misinterpreted the questions, but asserted that he did not intentionally falsify his 
security clearance application. (SOR Answer; GE 1; Tr. 77-88) In reviewing 
Applicant’s April 2014 OPM PSI, he made numerous other mistakes when completing 
his security clearance application relating to other areas such as past addresses, 
education, military record, and family members. (GE 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted copies of his DD-214s reflecting his 20 years of service in 
the Army and a favorable reference letter from his program manager. (AE D, AE E, AE 
H) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security 
decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
In ISCR Case No. 09-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s 
 
7 
 
 
obligations under [Directive] ¶ E.31.14 for pertinent allegations. At that 
point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is 
not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The Government established the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                          
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating 
condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully applicable except for AG ¶ 20(d) to 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b, 1.e – 1.f, 1.h, 1.l. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
documentation relating to the remaining SOR debts such as: (1) proof of payments, 
such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the 
creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;2 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts 
and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment 
plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to 
resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Lastly, Applicant 
failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt 
disputes. 
   
At a minimum, Applicant was put on notice that his financial history was a 
concern to the Government during his April 24, 2014 OPM PSI and again when he 
was issued his July 2016 SOR. It is troubling that Applicant did not make a more 
concerted effort to regain financial responsibility given his background, education, and 
resources. In short, there is insufficient assurance that his financial problems are 
being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
                                                          
 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
9 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his May 2014 security clearance 
application. Given his experience completing security clearance applications, 
Applicant knew that lying about any aspect of his security clearance history would be 
discovered.   
 
Based on the available information, it appears Applicant was confused or 
careless when completing his May 2014 security clearance application. His lack of 
attention to detail cannot be imputed as a willful and deliberate attempt to undermine 
the investigative process. Although the information he provided proved to be incorrect, 
I attribute this lapse to carelessness and am satisfied that he did not deliberately fail to 
disclose the required information.3 
 
In summary, Applicant was able to mitigate personal conduct concerns 
stemming from allegedly falsifying his security clearance application, but he was 
unable to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. In addition to 
evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guidelines 
F and E, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person 
                                                          
3 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
10 
 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been gainfully employed, and he is presumed 
to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting 
his financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for 
access to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal 
focus of these adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against the 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
