 
1 
  
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08046 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant surrendered her 
Australian passport to her company’s security officers, but reacquired it without informing 
her security officers she had done so. She has not mitigated the foreign preference 
security concerns under Guideline C or the personal conduct security concerns under 
Guideline E due to her connections with Australia. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 8, 2016, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing foreign preference security 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
concerns and personal conduct concerns. On July 12, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR 
and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. On August 26, 2016, Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the 
Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained five 
attachments (Items). On September 12, 2016, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, 
along with notice of her opportunity to object to the Government’s evidence and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. No 
response was received. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted that after becoming a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in April 2005, she applied for and was issued Australian passports in July 
2009 and December 2012. She admitted to possessing the Australian passport issued in 
December 2012, which expires in December 2022. (Item 5) She admitted she 
surrendered her Australian passport in March 2012 and was informed by her employer 
that obtaining another Australian passport would adversely affect her security clearance. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 42-year-old administrative assistant working for a defense contractor 
since December 2011. She seeks to retain a security clearance. She has not served in 
the military. The DoD moved her now ex-husband to Australia after he retired after serving 
20 years on active duty.3 (Item 2) She was married from November 2000 through April 
2010. (Item 2) She wanted to return to the United States permanently, he did not.  
 
Applicant was born in Australia. In July 2000, she entered the United States and 
in April 2005, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Item 2) She has not voted in an 
Australian election since 2000. (Item 2) On July 27, 2005, she was issued a U.S. passport, 
which expired in July 2015. (Item 2) She co-owned two homes in Australia, but has sold 
both of them. (Item 2, Item 3) She co-owns a home in California. (Item 3) She has no 
financial interests in Australia. Her parents, brother, grandmother, aunt, and two cousins 
are citizens and residents of Australia. Her mother is a bank manager and her father is 
retired from a telecommunications company. (Item 3) Her brother owns a construction 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
3 Applicant’s husband’s branch of service is not found in the record. 
 
3 
company. Her grandmother is a retired department store clerk. Her aunt is a retired payroll 
clerk. One cousin is a stay-at-home mother and the other is a wine maker. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant has visited Australia five times since 2001: from July 2001 to August 
2001, in December 2002 and January 2003, in June 2004 and July 2004, in February 
2006 and March 2006, from April 2007 through July 2009, and from August 2009 through 
April 2010. (Items 2 and 3) She also traveled to Australia six times on U.S. Government 
business travel: February 2006 and March 2006, from April 2007 through April 2010, 
September 2010, June 2011, December 2012, and in May 2016. (Item 2, Item 4) 
 
Although a dual citizen of the United States and Australia, her Australian 
citizenship requires her to enter Australia only on an Australian passport and is not 
allowed to enter on a visa or on a passport from any other country. (Item 3) She is willing 
to surrender her Australian passport to her company’s security office under the condition 
she could obtain it for verified travel to Australia. (Item 3) She has used her Australian 
passport only for travel to Australia. All other travel is done on her U.S. passport. (Item 3)  
 
On Applicant’s first trip to Australia after acquiring U.S. citizenship she entered 
Australia on her U.S. passport, but left Australia on her Australian passport. (Item 1) On 
all subsequent trips to Australia, when she attempted to enter Australia on her U.S. 
passport, she was denied entry because she had overstayed her visit to Australia as a 
U.S. citizen on her U.S. passport. (Item 1) She would then present her Australian passport 
and would be allowed to enter Australia. 
 
Knowing she should always use her U.S. passport, Applicant contacted Australian 
immigration for assistance. (Item 1) She provided a March 2014 letter from Australia’s 
Department of Immigration and Boarder Protection stating Australian citizens are required 
to enter Australia using their Australian passport. (Item 1) 
 
In March 2012, Applicant surrendered her then valid Australian passport to her 
company’s security office. (Item 4) The expectation when she relinquished custody of her 
Australian passport was that she was not to obtain another Australian passport. (Item 3) 
She was advised at that time that should she receive another Australian passport, her 
security clearance would be adversely affected. (Item 4) Nine months later, in December 
2012, she obtained another Australian passport in order to travel to Australia to visit her 
family for two weeks at Christmas time. (Item 4) She had already purchased a $4,000 
airplane ticket for her travel to Australia. She was aware she should have discussed the 
reobtaining of her Australian passport “before, if not, after her travel to Australia.” (Item 3) 
 
Applicant indicated that it was a lack of judgment to not inform her employer of her 
new Australian passport. In August 2013, she submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) when she applied for a job with another department of 
the U.S. government. On that e-QIP, she did list her 2012 Australian passport. (Item 1) In 
 
4 
February 2014, Applicant’s employer learned she had reacquired her Australian passport 
in December 2012. (Item 4) Her company did not learn of the Applicant reobtaining her 
foreign passport from her. At that time, Applicant’s access to classified information was 
precluded. In September 2016, the company returned her Australian passport to her. In 
May 2016, she used her Australian passport to visit her family in Australia. (Item 4)  
 
Department Counsel did not file documents setting forth facts that indicate that 
Australia is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified information or poses a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation or coercion.  
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
5 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline C: Foreign Preference  
  
AG ¶ 9 sets out the foreign preference concern:  
  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship.  
  
AG ¶ 10 lists the conditions that could raise a foreign preference security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case:  
  
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country;  
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate security 
official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any country 
other than the United States;  
  
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.;  
  
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to:  
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and  
  
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. 
national security interests;  
  
 
6 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and  
  
(f)  an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of intent 
to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions.  
  
 Applicant failed to disclose to her company’s security officials her reacquisition of 
her Australian passport in December 2012 after having been told in March 2012 that 
reacquisition of her foreign passport would negatively affect her security clearance. AG ¶ 
10(b) applies. There is no evidence that she fails to use her U.S. passport when she 
enters or exits the United States. Her voting in Australian elections prior to becoming a 
naturalized U.S. citizen is not an activity that conflicts with U.S. national security interests. 
There is no evidence that she uses foreign citizenship to protect her financial interests in 
violation of U.S. law. She has not declared an intent to renounce her U.S. citizenship.  
 
 Under the current guidelines, Applicant would be allowed to have her Australian 
passport so long as she fully disclosed it and used her U.S. passport when entering or 
exiting the United States. Possession of the foreign passport is not the issue, failing to 
disclose her possession of the Australian passport is the issue. When she surrendered 
her foreign passport in 2012, the expectation was that she would not be obtaining a 
foreign passport in the future and doing so would adversely affect her holding a security 
clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 11 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlement or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or 
the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by 
U.S. law; and 
 
7 
 
(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving the 
approval by the agency head or designee.  
 
Australia is the country in issue in this case and it is a close ally of the United 
States. AG ¶ 11(a), (b), (e), and (f) have some applicability. However, these mitigating 
conditions are insufficient to overcome Applicant’s failure to report or disclose her 
Australian passport to appropriate security officials. 
 
In March 2012, when Applicant surrendered her Australian passport, the 
expectation was that she was not to obtain another Australian passport. At that time she 
was advised that should she receive another Australian passport, her security clearance 
would be adversely affected. However, nine months later, in December 2012, she 
obtained another Australian passport in order to traveled to Australia to visit her family for 
two weeks at Christmas time. She acknowledged she was aware she should have 
discussed the reobtaining of her Australian passport “before, if not, after her travel to 
Australia.” It was not until February 2014 that her employer became aware she had 
reobtained her Australian passport. The cited mitigating factors do not fully mitigate the 
foreign preference security concern. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns for personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
 When Applicant surrendered her Australian passport in March 2012, she was 
informed that to acquire a new Australian passport would adversely affect her security 
clearance. She revealed possession of her Australian passport on her August 2013 e-
QIP when she applied for employment with a different government agency. However, her 
current employer did not learn that she had obtained a new passport until February 2014. 
She acknowledged it was poor judgment not to immediately inform her employer of the 
new passport. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
 
8 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 The disqualifying condition listed in AG ¶ 16(b) applies. None of the mitigating 
factors listed in AG ¶ 17 apply. There was no prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. Applicant 
obtained her new Australian passport in December 2012, but her employer did not learn 
she had a new foreign passport until February 2014. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
As a requirement of her Australian citizenship, she must use an Australian 
passport when she travels to Australia. All other travel is on her U.S. passport. I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. My comments under Guidelines C and E are 
incorporated into this whole-person analysis.  
  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant failed to meet her 
burden to mitigate the foreign preference and personal conduct security concerns raised 
by the facts of this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 
9 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C, Foreign Preference: AGAINST APPLICANT  
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E, Personal Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
