 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 15-08047 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for alcohol 
consumption under Guideline G, criminal conduct under Guideline J, and personal 
conduct under Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) On September 18, 2015, Applicant was 
interviewed by a security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management. (Item 
5, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)). Applicant verified the accuracy of the PSI on June 
23, 2016. (Item 5) After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On October 13, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant detailing two allegations of security concerns for personal conduct under 
Guideline E, two allegation of security concern for alcohol consumption under Guideline 
                                                          
1 The SOR was issued to Applicant in her maiden name,        . She married on September 2, 2016, and 
now uses her married name                             . 
 
2 
 
 
G, and one allegation of criminal conduct under Guideline J. (Item 1) The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2016. She admitted all of the 
security concern allegations. She requested that the matter be decided on the written 
record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
November 13, 2017. (Item 6) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on November 30, 2016. Applicant was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. (Item 7) Applicant responded to the FORM on January 10, 2017. (Item 8) On 
January 27, 2017, Department Counsel noted that she had no objection to 
consideration of Applicant’s reply to the FORM. (Item 9) I was assigned the case on 
March 12, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 38 years old. She graduated from high school in June 1995 and had some 
college courses. She married in September 2016. Applicant entered active duty in the 
U.S. Navy in November 1995, and received an honorable discharge in January 2010. 
She was granted access to classified information in November 1995. She was 
unemployed from January 2010 until June 2010 when she was employed in a 911 
center. She left the 911 center in March 2011 to accept employment as an 
administrative assistant for a defense contractor. She continued that employment until 
she became a senior administrative assistant in May 2015 for her present defense 
contractor employer. (Item 3, e-QIP; Item 5, PSI) 
 
 The SOR alleges that in response to questions on the e-QIP concerning her 
police record in the last seven years and offenses involving alcohol, she did not report 
that she was convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) in both March 2011 and June 
2012. The convictions and her failure to report them led to the alcohol consumption, 
criminal conduct, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
 Court records show, and Applicant admits, that she was arrested on March 1, 
2011 for DWI. Applicant was driving home from a bar after consuming alcohol when she 
was stopped by police for speeding. She failed field sobriety and breathalyzer tests. 
Applicant was convicted of the misdemeanor offense of DWI on May 5, 2011, and 
sentenced to an $800 fine, two days confinement, 12 months of probation, and five days 
of community service. Applicant completed all aspects of the sentence.  
                                                          
2 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant consumed about four beers at a bar on June 10, 2012. Applicant 
admits driving after leaving the bar. Applicant admits that she was stopped for crossing 
the center line and that she failed a breathalyzer test. Court records show and Applicant 
admits that she was charged with DWI, but convicted of reckless driving. She was fined 
$1,000 and placed on probation for 12 months. She paid the fine and was released from 
probation after serving approximately nine months of probation. (Item 4, Court Records; 
Item 5, PSI) 
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol at age 22. She drank socially on the weekends 
consuming about 3 to 5 beers on some week ends. She would become intoxicated 
about 2 or 3 times a year, usually after consuming about seven beers. She defines 
intoxication as having a blurred memory. Alcohol has no effect on her behavior. She has 
never been treated for alcohol abuse. She does not intend to abuse alcohol in the 
future. (Item 5, PSI at 4) Under state law, Applicant was required to successfully 
complete a DWI alcohol and drug use risk reduction program from a certified program. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation that she completed the 
required clinical evaluations and DWI alcohol use risk reduction programs after each of 
her DWI convictions. As part of her sentence, she was required to attend and provide 
documents to show that she completed a Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) victim 
impact panel program. (Item 2, Response to SOR, certificates) 
 
 Applicant admits she did not make responsible choices concerning alcohol 
consumption in 2011 and 2012. She was transitioning between jobs and she was not 
certain of her future. She completed the alcohol and driving awareness classes and a 
MADD victim impact course. She performed community service for a theater group, and 
now volunteers for the theater group as the publicity manager and a member of the 
board of directors of the theater group. She returned to school and is taking courses to 
be a paralegal. She married in September 2016. Applicant now has the support she 
needs to manage the stressors in her life. She acknowledged her problems with alcohol 
abuse and has been more responsible concerning her use of alcohol. While Applicant 
still consumes alcohol, she has not had any alcohol-related issues since June 2012. 
(Item 2, Response to SOR) 
 
 Applicant related in her response to the SOR that she provided detailed 
information at the PSI concerning her responses to the criminal history questions on the 
e-QIP. She stated that she did not deliberately provide false information on the e-QIP. 
She did not fully understand the criminal history questions on the e-QIP. She did not 
know if she needed to report the DWI offense that was reduced to reckless driving. 
Applicant said that she cooperated with the security investigator and provided full and 
complete answers to all of his questions. She does not have a history or pattern of 
dishonesty or rules violations. (Item 2)  
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant again pointed out that she provided the 
security investigator with full and complete information. She did not understand or 
comprehend the questions on the e-QIP relating to her criminal history. She was 
unaware whether her convictions were at the state or federal level. She was confused, 
 
4 
 
 
and did not know if the convictions and sentences were sealed, expunged or dismissed. 
At the PSI, she did not hide any information, but fully informed the investigator of her 
confusion. She provide information on the charges without being prompted by the 
investigator. She provided him with clear and complete information concerning the 
potential personal conduct offenses since by then she understood the questions and 
issues, and she was no longer confused. (Item 9) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)  
 
Applicant admits that she was arrested and convicted of driving under the 
influence of alcohol in March 2011 and again in June 2012. Her alcohol-related arrests 
are sufficient to establish the following Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions 
under AG ¶ 22:  
 
(a) Alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 I considered the following Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of action taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
 
6 
 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant admits her alcohol-related arrests and 
convictions. The admissions are an important step forward in mitigating her alcohol-
related problems. The excessive alcohol consumptions leading to the DWIs happened 
over six and seven years ago. Applicant completed all parts of both sentences including 
attendance at two alcohol and driving awareness classes, and a MADD victim impact 
course. She performed community service for a theater group, and now volunteers as 
the theater group’s publicity manager and as a member of the board of directors. 
Applicant returned to school and is taking courses to be a paralegal. She married in 
September 2016. Applicant now has the support she needs to manage the stressors in 
her life. She acknowledged her problems with alcohol abuse, and reports she has been 
more responsible concerning her use of alcohol. She has not had any alcohol-related 
incident or issue since June 2012. 
 
 Applicant presented evidence to establish a pattern of responsible alcohol 
consumption. She showed sufficient evidence of action taken to overcome her alcohol 
consumption problems. While she admits that she continues to consume alcohol, her 
consumption has been moderate and within acceptable levels. Accordingly, Applicant 
presented sufficient evidence to show a change of circumstance. She established that 
she can now control her alcohol consumption impulses. She presented information 
leading to a favorable opinion of her reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence shows 
that Applicant has reformed or been rehabilitated. I find that Applicant mitigated alcohol 
consumption security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during the national security investigation and adjudicative process. (AG ¶ 15). 
Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the person’s 
past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant was convicted in 2011 and 2012 of DWI. In response to police record 
questions on her August 13, 2015 e-QIP, Applicant responded “no” to the questions 
asking if in the last seven years she had been charged, convicted or sentenced for any 
crime in any court; and had she ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol or 
 
7 
 
 
drugs. Applicant’s incorrect responses to the questions raises the Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification 
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities).  
I considered the following Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advise of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressor, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other appropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 The mitigating conditions apply. Since the security clearance process relies on 
an applicant providing correct information, Applicant’s action in providing false 
information is not a minor offense. The personal conduct security concern is that 
Applicant “deliberately” did not provide correct, true, and accurate information. Applicant 
denies that she deliberately provided false information on the e-QIP. She pointed out 
that she did not fully understand or comprehend the criminal history questions on the e-
QIP. She did not know if she needed to report the DWI offense that was reduced to 
reckless driving. She was not aware whether her convictions were at the state or federal 
level. She did not know if the convictions and sentences were sealed, expunged, or 
dismissed.  
 
 She fully informed the investigator of her confusion. She did not hide any 
information from him at the PSI. She cooperated with the security investigator and 
provided correct, clear, and complete information without being prompted. She 
cooperated with the security investigator since by then she understood the questions 
and issues, and she was no longer confused. The record shows that she made an 
adequate effort to tell a consistent, straight, truthful story to the investigator. The 
 
8 
 
 
information concerning her alcohol use is accurate because it came directly from 
Applicant.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Applicant’s admissions and 
criminal justice reports verify her criminal offenses. The information raising alcohol 
consumption and personal conduct security concerns are also alleged as criminal 
conduct security concerns. Applicant’s conduct causing criminal conduct security 
concerns are explicitly covered under alcohol consumption and personal conduct. The 
Guideline J concerns constitute a duplication of the concerns under Guidelines G and E. 
As noted above, the facts are insufficient to find alcohol consumption and personal 
conduct security concerns and do not warrant revocation of Appellant’s security 
clearance. Accordingly, criminal conduct security concerns are found for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted the DWI 
offenses. She denied deliberately failing to provide full and correct information on her e-
QIP. Applicant provided enough details about what she did to address her alcohol 
consumption problems. She provided sufficient evidence and documentation that she 
worked diligently and resolved her alcohol problems. There is sufficient assurance that 
her alcohol-related problems are resolved, under control, and will not recur in the future.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Her strong, reasonable, and responsible actions towards her alcohol issues are an 
indication that she will protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. She 
sufficiently explained her responses on the e-QIP to establish that she did not 
deliberately provide false or incorrect information.  
 
Applicant adequately provided facts to mitigate the security concerns. In short, 
the file contains sufficient evidence to establish that she made adequate efforts to 
mitigate alcohol consumption and personal conduct issues as well as criminal conduct 
issues. Her actions to overcome alcohol consumption issues and her efforts to provide 
accurate information on her security clearance application are firm indications that she 
will adequately safeguard classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Applicant established her suitability for access to classified information. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Appellant mitigated the alcohol, personal conduct, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
