KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the
Judge. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-08340.a1
DATE: 08/02/2018
DATE: August 2, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-08340
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
16, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On April 26, 2018, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Philip J. Katauskas denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains two credit reports that post-date the Judge’s decision and Applicant’s arguments
concerning her debts based on those credit reports.  The credit reports constitute new evidence that
the Appeal Board cannot consider.   See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant’s appeal brief also contains a court document not previously submitted and raises
arguments concerning the Guideline J allegation.  However, the Judge found in favor of her on that
allegation. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan     
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale        
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
