1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-05426 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
Applicant presented sufficient credible information to mitigate financial trustworthiness 
concerns. 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
On December 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for a public trust position to work 
for a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 3, 2015, and April 1, 2015. (Item 6, 
Summary of Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the 
background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility 
(DOD CAF) could not make the affirmative findings required to grant Applicant access 
to sensitive information.  
 
On May 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) for financial trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
DOD took the action under DoD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel 
2 
 
Security Program (PSP) which became effective on April 3, 2017, and it incorporates 
and replaces DoD 5200.2-R. While this case was pending a decision, the Director of 
National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in 
Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), which he 
made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 5, 2017 (Item 2). She admitted the 
eight allegations of financial security concern, except she questioned the amount of the 
debts in SOR 1.g and 1.h. She provided significant information concerning the status of 
her finances, and requested a decision on the record. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on November 22, 2017. (Item 8). Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 8, 2018, and was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant provided additional information in response to the 
FORM on February 21, 2018. (Item 9) On February 26, 2018, Department Counsel 
noted that she had no objection to consideration of the additional material. (Item 10) I 
was assigned the case on April 13, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 6) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over her objection. She was further advised 
that she could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no 
objection was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she 
waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not raise 
any objection to consideration of the PSI when she responded to the FORM. Since 
there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 52 years old. She received a bachelor’s degree in August 1990. She was 
employed as a consultant from May 2003 until March 2011, when she was laid off by 
her employer because they lacked work for her. She was unemployed until September 
2014, when she became a consultant for her present DOD contractor. She never 
married and has no children. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated November 3, 2015)  
 
The SOR alleges and credit reports (Item 4, dated January 24, 2015; and Item 5, 
dated February 23, 2017) confirm the following eight delinquent debts for Applicant; a 
credit-card debt charged off for $1,219 (SOR 1.a); a telephone-service account in 
collection for $484 (SOR 1.b); car loan charged off for $7,315 (SOR 1.c); a time-share 
account in collection for $1,642 (SOR 1.d); a television-service account in collection for 
3 
 
$144 (SOR 1.e); a waste-disposal account in collection for $136 (SOR 1.f); an unpaid 
rent account of $4,200 (SOR 1.g); and an unpaid tuition account to a university for 
$2,600 (SOR 1.h). Applicant admitted the debts in SOR 1.g and 1.h but disputed the 
amount of the debts. She claims the amount of the SOR 1.g debt is only $3,300 and the 
1.h debt is $1,661. The amount of the delinquent debt as reported in the SOR is 
approximately $17,740.  
 
 Applicant did not detail reasons for her delinquent debts. However, it is noted that 
she was unemployed over three and a half years. She received unemployment 
compensation and worked two part-time jobs. During her unemployment, she was able 
to enter a debt relief plan, keep her bills current, pay off some of her past-due debts, 
and not incur any additional delinquent debts. (Item 2, Response to the SOR; Item 9, 
Response to FORM) 
.  
In her response to the SOR, Applicant provided documents to establish that the 
credit-card debt listed at SOR 1.a has been resolved. She also provided documents to 
establish the wireless debt at SOR 1.b was settled for an amount less than the total 
debt. Applicant provided documents to verify that she paid the settlement resolving the 
debt. Applicant presented sufficient documents that she paid and resolved the 
automobile loan at SOR 1.c. Applicant entered a settlement agreement with the 
developer for the time share. She paid half the debt in one payment and made two 
additional payments. She has resolved this debt. Applicant paid the television-service 
debt at SOR 1.e. She also paid the debt at SOR 1.f to the waste-management 
company. She presented receipts for the payment as well as letters noting the two 
debts were paid in full. Applicant claims she paid the past-due rent debt. (SOR 1.g). She 
presented a letter, dated February 8, 2018, that she sent to the landlord requesting that 
he provide her with a document indicating that the debt was paid in full. She has not 
received a reply from the landlord. Applicant received a settlement offer for the tuition 
noted at SOR 1.h. She presented documents that she is making the required payments 
on this debt.  
 
Applicant also included information on a debt not listed on the SOR, but listed on 
her credit report. She presented receipts for her payment of this debt and the debt is 
now resolved. (Item 9, Response to FORM) Of the eight debts on the SOR, six have 
been paid and resolved, and she is current with the payments on settlement 
agreements on the remaining two debts.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
4 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive information] will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There is a trustworthiness concern for a failure or inability to live within one=s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations, and may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulation, raising questions 
about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in their obligation to protect sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
5 
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has significant unresolved 
consumer debts. Her delinquent debts are established by credit reports and her 
admissions in the e-QIP and her response to the SOR. The debts pose a 
trustworthiness concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions under 
AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant incurred debt because of an extended 
period of unemployment. She received some unemployment compensation and also 
worked two part-time jobs. The income she received enabled her to make payments on 
some of her debts. Applicant has now been employed in her career field for over two 
years. Even though Applicant’s debts are numerous and recent, they were incurred 
under circumstances making recurrence unlikely since she is now fully employed. 
Applicant did not present information that she received financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant contacted her creditors and made arrangements to either pay or settle 
her debts. She presented sufficient evidence that she paid four of the debts for the full 
amount owed, and settled and paid two more debts for less than the amount owed. She 
claims she paid a debt for rent but has not received a receipt from the landlord. She 
6 
 
wrote to the landlord requesting the receipt. She received settlement agreements from 
the creditor for the remaining debt, and she presented sufficient documents to establish 
she is current with payment on the settlement. This is evidence of a good-faith effort to 
pay delinquent debts. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has a 
reasonable and adequate plan to resolve her financial problems and that she is 
adhering to the payment plans. There is a firm indication that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period.  
 
 The record contains corroborating or substantiating documentation of Applicant’s 
efforts to mitigate and resolve her financial problems. In requesting an administrative 
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. She provided sufficient 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial trustworthiness 
concerns. She provided adequate credible information regarding her past efforts to 
address her delinquent debts. She presented a sufficiently credible plan of how and 
when she planned to resolve her debts. Applicant’s reasonable payments on her debts 
and her responsible plan to pay her debts shows that she has acted reasonably and 
honestly with regard to her financial duties and obligations. 
 
 I find that she acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. 
Her financial problems do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment. Applicant‘s information is sufficient to establish that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances and that her finances are under control. In short, 
the file provided by Applicant contains sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved her debts. Applicant 
has mitigated financial trustworthiness concerns. 
  
 Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a trustworthiness 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is required to show that 
she has a credible and reasonable plan to resolve her financial problems and that she 
has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant established her 
reasonable plan to resolve her delinquent debts, shown that she has taken sufficient 
actions to implement the plan, and established that she is managing her financial 
obligations within her resources. Accordingly, she established that she can be trusted to 
manage sensitive information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
and doubts pertaining to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and her 
eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, Applicant’s eligibility 
for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
