KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s contention that he is not participating in prostitution brings to mind a
Latin phrase, “res ipsa loquitur,” i.e., the thing speaks for itself.  He paid money to engage in
casual, sexual encounters.  Despite his claim to the contrary, the routine practice of paying a fee
to remove random women from bars and then later on that same occasion engage in sexual
activity with them is a form of prostitution. Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 16-03690.a1
DATE: 08/15/2018
DATE: August 15, 2018   
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03690
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John T. Heaney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 6, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 3, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola granted Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He is divorced.  From about
2011 to 2016, he traveled to Thailand.  While there, he frequented bars in which he would pay the
bar owner to date one of the female employees during her normal working hours.  The payment was
to compensate the bar owner for the female’s lost employment and also the female for her lost
wages.  “Sexual activity often occurs during these dates, but not always . . . .  There is nothing illegal
about this dating practice, and it is not alleged as being illegal.”  Decision at 2.  Applicant revealed
this conduct during a polygraph examination and indicated that he paid the women for
companionship, not sex.  He intends to continue to engage in this practice in Thailand and the United
States, as long as it is legal.  His family, friends, and coworkers are aware of this conduct.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant has not concealed his conduct.  The dating practice is consensual and totally legal.
The evidence is insufficient to raise security concerns.  
Discussion
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371, U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”   Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
2
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02322 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2018).  
Department Counsel contends the Judge erred in concluding that the Government failed to
establish any of the disqualifying conditions under Guidelines D or E.  More specifically,
Department Counsel argues that the Judge “failed to properly view Applicant’s conduct for what it
obviously was, the payment of prostitutes and their managers for sex” and “[t]he Judge’s
unquestioning acceptance of Applicant’s argument that he was merely dating Thai women he met
in a bar amounts to the turning of a blind eye to what was obviously occurring.”  Appeal Brief at 6
and 7.  We find Department Counsel’s arguments persuasive.  Security clearance determinations
must be “an overall common sense judgment” based on the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(c).  The evidence reflects that Applicant traveled to
Thailand eight times between 2011 and 2016.  Government Exhibit (GE) 3, Applicant Exhibit (AX)
A, and Tr. at 59-60.1  He traveled with a friend on some trips and on the others he went by himself. 
In a background interview, he described the process of paying “bar fees” or “bar fines” that he
encountered during his first trip in 2011.2  He stated:
[He and his friend] each dated a couple of different women on this trip, they paid
their bar fees, went to dinner and/ or dancing, and engaged in consensual sexual 
activity.  [He] engaged in sex with at least one to two women while on this trip. 
When they pay the bar fee, it does not mean they are paying for sex, sex is never
discussed, and the women are not obligated to sleep with the men who pay their bar
fee to take them out.  Prostitution is illegal in Thailand.  The women that they
engaged in sexual activity with were adults, and it was always consensual sex (no
other details recalled).3  
In discussing some of his other trips to Thailand, Applicant went on to say, “On every trip he also
engaged in sexual activity with at least one or two random women that he met at various bars and
1 Six of Applicant’s visits to Thailand are discussed in his background interview.  GE 3.  AX A lists seven trips.
At the hearing, he testified that the last time he visited Thailand was “[t]he end of last year.”  Tr. at 59-60.  This last trip
would have occurred in late 2016 and was not discussed in the background interview, which occurred in April 2016, or
listed in AX A. 
2 At the hearing, Applicant referred to the fee as a “bar fine.”  Tr. at 37.
3 GE 3 at 2.
3
clubs exactly like on the first trip he took in . . . 2011.”4  [Emphasis added] Id.  Additionally,
Applicant stated, “[He] only sees the women that he has sex with for one night, and he never keeps
in touch with them; there is never any close and continuing contact.”5  Id.  Applicant’s contention
that he is not participating in prostitution brings to mind a Latin phrase, “res ipsa loquitur,” i.e., the
thing speaks for itself.  He paid money to engage in casual, sexual encounters.  Despite his claim
to the contrary, the routine practice of paying a fee to remove random women from bars and then
later on that same occasion engage in sexual activity with them is a form of prostitution.  In the
above indented quote, Applicant admitted that prostitution is illegal in Thailand.6  Disqualifying
Condition 13(a) was established.7 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s conduct is at the very least high-risk sexual behavior that calls into
question his judgment.  Such behavior establishes disqualifying conditions under Guideline E that
address conduct involving questionable judgment.8 
 
Department Counsel also argues that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from the SOR allegations.  Of note, Applicant was clear in his background interview and in
his testimony at the hearing that he intends to continue to engage in the alleged sexual behavior.  GE
3 and Tr. at 59-60.   
4 Applicant testified that he did not engage in sexual activity with every women he has taken from the bars. 
Tr. at 39.   He also testified that, even though he never took a woman to a backroom of the bar to engage in sex, he stated,
“I’m sure there are some [bars] that have rooms that they can do that.”  Tr. at 40-41.
5 Applicant testified that one woman he meet in a bar he has had contact with two or three times.  Tr. at 45-46. 
See also, GE 3.
6 In the Appeal Brief, Department Counsel also notes that the U.S. State Department issued a Thailand Travel
Advisory in 2018 that states prostitution is illegal in Thailand.
7 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 13(a) states, “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual
has been prosecuted[.]”  
8 See, Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d).  These state:
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; [and]
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not
be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive
information. . . .  
4
We conclude that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  It fails
to consider important aspects of the case, reflects an error in judgment, and is so implausible that
it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference of opinion.  The record evidence establishes disqualifying
conditions under Guideline D and E.  Furthermore, we conclude that the record evidence, viewed
as a whole, is not sufficient to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Egan standard. 
5
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
