KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant had been aware of this security concern for at least ten years prior to the
issuance of the SOR but did not take reasonable steps to address it.  Indeed, Applicant states that
the debt was about $13,000 when she first became aware of it.  It has grown through the
application of interest and penalties and will continue to do so until it is resolved.  Her failure to
file her tax returns on time is a problem of long-standing duration, one of which she has been
aware for many years.  Applicant only recently began to address her tax problems, filing her
returns late and only two weeks before the hearing acquiring the assistance of an accountant.
Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 16-03595.a1
DATE: 08/27/2018
DATE: August 27, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 16-03595
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness 
designation.  On January 10, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 26, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert Tuider granted Applicant’s request for a
trustworthiness designation.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2015.  She has a master’s
degree.  Applicant separated from her husband in 2013 and has filed for divorce.  She has custody
of her 10-year-old child, but her husband is not paying child support.  The divorce is not final.  In
addition to her marital problems, Applicant has experienced medical problems, as has her son, and
she was unemployed in 2012. 
Applicant’s SOR alleged numerous delinquent debts, including a nearly $16,000 student
loan, medical debts, a Federal tax lien, and other collection accounts.  The SOR alleged that
Applicant failed to file and pay her state tax return for 2012 and that she did not file her Federal
returns for 2012 through 2014.  It also alleged that Applicant had a Federal tax lien entered against
her in 2010 for an amount in excess of $19,200.  Concerning the student loan, Applicant states that
it is her husband’s responsibility and will be allocated to him in the divorce decree.  The Judge
found that Applicant has paid or resolved a number of her smaller debts.  
Concerning Applicant’s tax problems, the Judge found that Applicant’s income was low until
she found her current job, and she could not file married filing jointly until she received copies of
her spouse’s income information.  Before establishing a payment plan, Applicant will need to file
her and her husband’s overdue tax returns.  As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had not filed her
2012 state tax return.  Applicant gave three reasons for having failed to file her Federal returns: (1)
her income was below the threshold for filing income taxes; (2) she did not have all the necessary
W-2s; and (3) she was worried that she would owe more taxes.  Two weeks before the hearing,
Applicant began working with her brother, an accountant, to resolve her tax issues.  The Judge found
that the income threshold for married filing separately was $3,800 for 2012 and increased by
relatively small amounts in the following years.  He found that, by subtracting Applicant’s W-2
information from her adjusted gross income for the years in question, Applicant was not required
to file her returns.  She filed the returns, however, and believes that her refunds will significantly
reduce her tax lien.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
Noting Applicant’s marital separation, unemployment, and medical problems, the Judge
concluded that she had demonstrated responsible action in regard to her delinquent debts.  He stated
that she had paid as many debts as possible and has a plan for resolving all of her debts.  Based on
her track record of debt resolution, the Judge concluded that future delinquent debt is not likely to
arise and that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control.  He
stated that it is unclear whether Applicant has any responsibility for the student loan and she will
need to establish a payment plan in the future to resolve the Federal tax lien.  He also observed that
“there is limited evidence of record that [Applicant] established and maintained contact with her
creditors.”  Decision at 8.  He concluded, however, that Applicant understands what she needs to
do to establish and maintain her financial stability.  
Discussion
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s favorable decision fails to address important
aspects of the case, such as the age of her debts, the recency of her efforts to resolve her tax
problems, and an absence of nexus between what he terms Applicant’s limited evidence in
mitigation and her multi-year failure to comply with her tax obligations.  We find Department
Counsel’s arguments to be persuasive.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
The significance of delinquent debts to the security clearance process is explained in the
Directive:
3
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  Directive,
Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 18.
Accordingly, in evaluating a case under Guideline F, a Judge should consider the extent to which
an applicant’s poor financial circumstances cast doubt upon his or her judgment, self control, and
other characteristics essential to protecting national security information.  See ADP Case No. 14-
03077 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2015).  
Concerning the Federal tax lien, we note Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, in which she
acknowledges that she first learned of the underlying tax debt in 2006.  She attributed this debt to
unfiled tax returns, along with bad financial decisions that she did not know about.  Accordingly,
Applicant had been aware of this security concern for at least ten years prior to the issuance of the
SOR but did not take reasonable steps to address it.  Indeed, Applicant states that the amount of the
debt was about $13,000 when she first became aware of it, permitting a reasonable inference that
it has grown through the application of interest and penalties and will continue to do so until it is
resolved.  Applicant’s Answer also underscores that her failure to file her tax returns on time is a
problem of long-standing duration, one of which she has been aware for many years.  However, as
Department Counsel argues, Applicant only recently began to address her tax problems, filing her
returns late and only two weeks before the hearing acquiring the assistance of an accountant.  
A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax returns
and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability
required of those granted access to sensitive or protected information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
02884 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2018).  See Cafeteria and Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v.
McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).  Failure to file tax returns
suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established government rules and
regulations.  Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for guarding sensitive or
protected information.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 15-00198 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2017).  In this
case, although giving due consideration to evidence of Applicant’s many difficult and challenging
life events–illness, marital separation, and unemployment–there is little in the record to explain
Applicant’s multi-year failure to have made even an attempt at resolving her tax problems.  Indeed,
her last communication from the IRS was in 2009 and, as the Judge noted, there is little evidence
of ongoing efforts to contact her creditors, resulting in a record that is lacking in mitigating
information.  
In a DOHA proceeding it is the applicant’s duty to present evidence in mitigation of the
concerns raised by his or her SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  A paucity of mitigating evidence can, and
often does, result in an adverse decision.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 11-11592 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 23,
2012).  In the case before us, we are persuaded by Department Counsel’s argument that Applicant
has not established a reasonable connection between her difficult circumstances and her failure to
file and pay taxes, including her state tax return which she did not file until after the hearing. 
Moreover, the timing of an applicant’s effort at debt payment is a relevant consideration, one which
4
the Judge did not address in his analysis.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03778 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug.
4, 2017).  Examining Applicant’s tax problems in light of the Judge’s finding that the status of her
other large debt, the student loan, is not clear, we conclude that the Judge’s analysis failed to take
into account significant factors that worked against his favorable decision.  
We also note Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge erred finding that Applicant did
not have to file Federal tax returns for the years in question due to insufficient income.  We are
persuaded that the record does not support such a finding, in light of Hearing Exhibit II, an IRS
document, to the effect that it is gross income that governs this matter rather than adjusted gross
income, which the Judge employed.  Be that as it may, we note Department Counsel’s argument that
Applicant’s various explanations for her security-significant conduct were not totally consistent,
which, again, impairs the overall quality of her effort to establish mitigation.  Given the above, we
conclude that the Judge’s decision failed to consider important aspects of the case and ran contrary
to the weight of the evidence.  Accordingly, we conclude that the Judge’s decision is not sustainable.
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
