KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: An applicant who begins to resolve his or her financial problems only after being
placed on notice that his or her clearance is in jeopardy may lack the judgment and self-
discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or when there is no immediate threat to his or
her own interests.  We agree with Department Counsel that such judgment and self-discipline
concerns are raised in this case.  The Judge did not discuss this important aspect of the case,
which impairs his analysis.  Moreover, the Judge also did not address Applicant’s failure to file
his 2015 income tax returns in a timely manner. Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 16-03187.a1
DATE: 08/01/2018
DATE: August 1, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03187
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Wayne M. Pecht, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 25, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 19, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant was self-employed from about 2009 to 2011 because he was unable to find work
in his field.  During that period, his income was considerably reduced.  In his security clearance
application (SCA), he refers to that period as “unemployment” and much of his debt was acquired
then.  He now earns about $78,000 annually.  His wife returned to the workforce shortly before the
hearing after a lengthy period of unemployment.  With her employment, they will be able to move
beyond living paycheck-to-paycheck.  
Applicant has 12 delinquent debts totaling about $27,000.  His goal is to satisfy the debts by
the end of 2018.  Of those debts, he has already satisfied a charged-off student loan for about
$10,160 and two other charged-off accounts for about $630 and $290.  He has not yet taken action 
to resolve eight medical debts totaling about $1,360.  He delayed taking action on the medical debts
because he was contemplating bankruptcy, but has abandoned that idea.  He also has a charged-off
account for about $15,000 that resulted from the voluntary repossession of a recreational vehicle. 
He has asked the creditor to verify the amount owed on that vehicle.  
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for 2012, 2013, and 2014 in
a timely manner.1  He filed those tax returns shortly before the hearing.   He attributed this delay to
his anxiety and depression, but also noted the need to obtain some of his wife’s missing tax
documents.  He is now taking medication for his medical condition and is able to prepare his tax
returns.  He hopes to received tax refunds for 2012-2016, which he would use to satisfy outstanding
debts.  
The Judge’s Analysis
1 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file state income tax returns in two states.  The Judge noted that
Applicant testified that he did not live in one of those states and that Applicant’s attorney will looking into the claim by
that state.  Decision at n.4 and 6.
2
Mitigating condition 20(b)2 applies because of Applicant’s and his wife’s unemployment,
his depression and anxiety, and his actions such as submitting tax filing extension requests,
voluntarily returning a vehicle he could not afford, moving to a recreational vehicle to economize,
and supplementing his income with a part-time job.   He has satisfied a notable percentage of his
delinquent debts and his tax filing deficiency.  He has a plan to resolve the remaining debts.  He has
made solid strides towards addressing his financial issues.
Discussion
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive, Encl. 
2 App. A ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Department Counsel contends that the record in this case does not support the Judge’s
favorable mitigation analysis.  He argues that the Judge failed to consider important aspects of the
case and that his decision runs counter to the weight of the record evidence.  Department Counsel’s
arguments have merit. 
Department Counsel notes that Applicant filed his delinquent tax returns, but argues that the
timing of the resolution of those tax filing deficiencies is an important factor to consider in analyzing
the extent to which he has mitigated the alleged security concerns.  In his SCA of December 2014,
Applicant disclosed that he did not file his 2012 and 2013 Federal and state income tax returns, that
he filed extension requests and forgot about filing the tax returns, and that he planned to file them
with his 2014 tax returns.  Government Exhibit (GE) 1.  At that point, he was placed on notice of
the security significance of failing to file tax returns.  In his background interview in January 2015,
2 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(b) states, “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death,
divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
3
he stated that he intended to file the delinquent tax returns in March 2015, but he failed to do so. 
GE 2.  Two years following that interview, when he responded to the SOR, he stated that he would
file them in  2017.  By the date originally set for the hearing in April 2017, the delinquent tax returns
still were not filed.  At the hearing in June 2017, Applicant testified:
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  Now we have introduced tax returns for 2012, ̀ 13, ̀ 14, ̀ 15,
and `16.  When did you prepare those tax returns?
[Applicant]: The 2014 though `16  --  `16 I prepared just before the deadline for
filing.  And then `14 and `15 I did about three weeks ago.  And then 2012 and `13 
I just did a couple of nights ago.  I was waiting on some missing w2's from my wife’s
ex-employer.3
We have previously noted that an applicant who begins to resolve his or her financial problems only
after being placed on notice that his or her clearance is in jeopardy may lack the judgment and self-
discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or when there is no immediate threat to his or
her own interests.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015).  We agree with
Department Counsel that such judgment and self-discipline concerns are raised in this case.  The
Judge did not discuss this important aspect of the case, which impairs his analysis.  Moreover, the
Judge also did not address Applicant’s failure to file his 2015 income tax returns in a timely manner
as revealed in the above quote.  
Department Counsel also challenges the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s tax filing
deficiencies were due to depression and anxiety.  In doing so, he cites to the Judge’s findings and
conclusions that “[Applicant] is now on medication for anxiety and depression . . . [and] was able
to prepare his own federal tax returns with commercial software[;]” “Now with appropriate
medication Applicant is capable of timely filing his federal taxes[;]” and “Further action was
deferred only because of his temporary depression and anxiety, not oversight or disregard of IRS
rules.” Appeal Brief at 3-4, n.7, and 8, quoting from Decision at 3, 4, and n.5.  Department Counsel
argues the record does not support findings or conclusions that imply Applicant’s use of medication
was a recent development.  Department Counsel notes that Applicant testified that he has been
taking medication for medical conditions, including depression and anxiety, for a “good 8 years,
maybe 10 years” (i.e., since about 2007 and 2009) and those medications were effective.  Tr. at 26-
27.  Such testimony, which was not addressed in the decision, undercuts the Judge’s mitigation
analysis that Applicant’s depression was a temporary condition that was recently resolved through
medication.4  
3 Tr. at 17.
4 While this case was pending before the Board, we issued a decision in another case with some overlapping
issues.  In both cases, Department Counsel made arguments regarding mitigating condition 20(g).  We do not agree with
Department Counsel’s arguments for reasons we laid out in detail in the prior case.  See ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 4,
n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018).  
4
Department Counsel further notes that Applicant has resolved only three of the 12 delinquent
debts and that he resolved those debts just prior to, or after, the hearing .  Tr. 22-23 and Applicant’s
Exhibits (AE) H, I, and K.  Department Counsel also highlights that Applicant has not addressed the
largest debt of $15,000 that became delinquent in 2012 or the eight medical debts ranging in
amounts from about $30 to $350 even though he had an adjusted gross income that ranged between
$114,000 to $136,000 from 2014 to 2016.  AE B-D.  Additionally, Department Counsel points out
that Applicant testified he earned about $5,000 per year in income from 2012 to 2016 that he did not
report on his income tax returns and that he needed to amend those tax returns.  Tr. 23-24 and 42-43.
This additional income will reduce any tax refunds due for those years, which as the Judge noted,
Applicant had hoped to use for paying the remaining delinquent debts.  Department Counsel’s
arguments call into question whether Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or
whether he will follow though on a plan to resolve the remaining debts.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) for the proposition that promises of future payment are not
a substitute for a history of payment of debts.  The record does not support the favorable application
of mitigating condition 20(d).5
We conclude that the Judge’s decision fails to consider important aspects of the case and runs
contrary to the weight of the record evidence.  Furthermore, we conclude that the record evidence,
viewed as a whole, is not sufficient to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Egan
standard.  The decision is not sustainable.  
5 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(d) states, “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”
5
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
