 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00784 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 (Item 1.) The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 On September 22, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), 
with one attached document (RSOR Exhibit A), and she requested that her case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)  On November 18, 2016, 
Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
A response was due on March 14, 2017. Applicant submitted additional documents, 
which have been identified and entered into evidence without objection as Post-FORM 
Exhibits A through H. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 1, 
2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 52 years old. She earned a Bachelor’s degree in Business 
Management in 2007. Applicant has been married twice, the first was from 1992 to 
1997, and the current marriage from 1997 to the present. She has two children. 
Applicant served in the United States Army from 1994 to 2000, and she received an 
Honorable Discharge. She has been employed as a Senior Training Specialist by a 
defense contractor since 2010; stationed out of the United States since 2011. She 
seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense 
sector. (Item 3.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists four allegations (1.a. through 1.d.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically delinquent debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The delinquent debts total 
more than $43,000. All of the SOR allegations were established by the RSOR and Items 
4 and 5, and they will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $19,693 Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has 
entered into a rehabilitation program with the collection agency of this debt. She claimed 
that she will have to make nine monthly payments before her account is out of default.  
(Item 2.) While documentation was attached to her RSOR showing that a payment plan 
had been arranged, no independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this 
debt has been resolved or significantly reduced. (RSOR Exhibit A.) 
 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $14,820. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has 
entered into a rehabilitation program with the collection agency of this debt. She claimed 
that she will have to make nine monthly payments before her account is out of default.  
(Item 2.) While documentation was attached to her RSOR showing that a payment plan 
had been arranged, no independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this 
debt has been resolved or significantly reduced. (RSOR Exhibit A.) 
 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $7,775. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has 
 
3 
 
entered into a rehabilitation program with the collection agency of this debt. She claimed 
that she will have to make nine monthly payments before her account is out of default.  
(Item 2.) While documentation was attached to her RSOR showing that a payment plan 
had been arranged, no independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this 
debt has been resolved or significantly reduced. (RSOR Exhibit A.) 
   
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,520, Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has 
entered into a rehabilitation program with the collection agency of this debt. She claimed 
that she will have to make 10 monthly payments before her account is out of default.  
(Item 2.) While documentation was attached to her RSOR showing that a payment plan 
had been arranged, no independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this 
debt has been resolved or significantly reduced. (RSOR Exhibit A.) 
    
 Applicant explained on her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) that her financial difficulties occurred because of the hardship of 
“living in a foreign country with two young children in need of a decent education.” She 
also wrote that the debts were as a result of school loans, which had arisen in 2007. 
She indicated that she was “working towards paying the balance.” (Item 3.) While the e-
QIP was completed and signed by Applicant on November 27, 2013, the arrangement 
to begin paying off the debts was not signed by Applicant until September 23, 2016. 
(RSOR Exhibit A.) 
 
Post-FORM Submissions 
 
 As discussed above, Applicant submitted seven Post-FORM Exhibits A through 
H, which will be discussed below:  
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit A is Applicant's second response to the SOR (RSOR 2.) In it, 
she wrote that she has made a good-faith effort to repay her overdue creditors and 
resolve her debts, but the debts were sold to other companies without her knowledge. 
She contended that she was unable to receive verification of which companies had 
secured the debts, and this situation was beyond her control. She indicated that now 
she has been able to determine who has her loans, she has entered into a loan 
consolidation program.  
 
 Applicant also explained that she first deferred her loans in 2008, because she 
was only working part-time. While she and her husband were able to both obtain 
employment in 2010 for a contractor outside of the United States, their limited income 
and the excessive expenses made it difficult to begin paying the loan, so she did not 
end the deferment. She wrote that because of her limited time and the changes in her 
life, the deferment ended in 2011, and the loan went into default without her knowledge.  
 
 Applicant explained her financial difficulties that made it difficult to pay back the 
loans. While her husband and she are contractor employees, her two children are not 
sponsored, so every 90 days, she has to take the two children outside of the country in 
which they reside to renew their dependent visas. This expense includes airfare for 
 
4 
 
three or four people.  She also has to send her children to private English speaking 
schools due to a lack of public school options.  
 
Applicant claimed that at the present time she is able to meet her financial 
obligations. However, she did not submit a Personal Financial Statement or budget 
plan, and the submitted documentation to establish her current financial position was 
limited.   
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit B is Applicant's loan consolidation documents, which show 
that in January and February 2017, Applicant made three payment of $199 toward her 
student debt consolidation. There are several loan payment plans with the standard 
plan of 360 monthly payments of $467.06, for a total to be repaid of $168,148.69. 
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit C includes the same documents that were submitted with 
Applicant's RSOR. (RSOR Exhibit A.)  
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit D includes four positive character letters and a Certificate of 
Appreciation. 
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit E include documents establishing the expenses that 
Applicant has incurred in support of her two children, primarily the education costs of 
sending them to school in a country other than the United States. 
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit F show the Visa renewal costs incurred by Applicant and her 
family. 
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit G includes Applicant's household expenses and receipts.  
 
 Post-FORM Exhibit H includes Applicant's earnings in 2010 and in 2017.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
6 
 
  Applicant had several delinquent student loan debts that were first incurred in 
2008, and which are not resolved.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c), as 
applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.   
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
7 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 While Applicant averred on the e-QIP that she completed and signed on 
November 27, 2013, that “she was working towards paying the balance,” the 
arrangement to begin paying off the debts was not signed by Applicant until September 
23, 2016, almost three years after the e-QIP was signed, and a month after the SOR 
was sent to her. Also, no independent evidence was introduced to establish that any of 
her debts have yet been significantly reduced or resolved. Finally, there has been no 
evidence introduced to establish that Applicant will be able to be responsibly resolve all 
of her debts in the future. Therefore, I do not find that any mitigating factor under AG ¶ 
20 has been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
 
