KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Despite Applicant having been employed for well over a year prior to the close of the
record, Applicant had not secured a payment plan or otherwise established a track record
regarding payment of her tax obligation.  As it stands, Applicant’s case for mitigation of this
particular concern is no more than a promise to resolve the debt in the future, which is not
sufficient to establish mitigation within the meaning of the Directive. Department Counsel states
that there is a paucity of evidence to establish mitigation of the two mortgage debts. Favorable
decision reversed. 
CASENO: 16-03889.a1
DATE: 08/09/2018
DATE: August 9, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03889
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 18, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 29, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision ran contrary to the weight of the record evidence, rendering it arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant began working for her current employer in December 2016, following a period
of unemployment that began in November 2015.  She holds a master’s degree and was first awarded
a security clearance in 2006.  Applicant has never had financial counseling.  Over the past decade,
Applicant acquired four properties, each of which was purchased as a new residence.  As Applicant
moved into her next property, the previous one was rented out.  Applicant now has only one house,
which is her residence.
Applicant’s SOR alleged several delinquent debts.  One of them was a Federal tax lien
entered against Applicant in September 2015.  The amount of the lien was over $92,000, a debt that
arose from capital gains as result of  the sale of a house.1  Due to her unemployment in 2015, the IRS
suspended collection of this debt.  Now that Applicant is employed, she has, through her accountant,
contacted the IRS to discuss a payment plan.  Other debts are a state tax lien and a past due
mortgage, both of which have been satisfied, the latter as result of a short sale.  
Applicant’s SOR includes obligations arising from first and second mortgages on one of her
properties.  When she bought this house in 2006, the price was $500,000.  However, when she tried
to sell it in 2011, the value had dropped to about $128,000.  The house went into foreclosure, selling
in 2013 for $128,000.  Applicant claimed that she received a cancellation notice for the deficiency,
but she did not corroborate this assertion.  The Judge found that the status of this debt is “unclear.” 
Decision at 3.  He made a similar finding about an allegation regarding the second mortgage,
observing that it is not clear what the status of this debt might be.
Applicant is currently financially stable.  She has over $2,200 in bank accounts and about
$225,000 in her retirement account.  All of Applicant’s debts have been settled, and she has no
desire to invest in real estate again.  She attributed her financial problems to serious illness that she
experienced in 2010 and 2011.  Her CPA is assisting her in resolving her unpaid debt, along with
1Applicant testified that she purchased the house in 1999 for $125,000 and sold it 2013 for $580,000.  Tr. at
45-46.
2
her tax lien and ongoing mortgage situation.  Applicant is willing and able to pay off her remaining
debt through payment plans.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant’s financial problems were the result of her illness and her
unemployment.  He cited to evidence that Applicant had attempted to work with her lenders,
attempted a short sale, hired a CPA, and was willing to get rid of properties that she could no longer
afford.  He also cited to her effort to get a payment plan with the IRS.  In the whole person analysis,
the Judge noted that Applicant had moved from house to house, “balancing payments on three
properties.”  Id. at 6.  When she became ill, she was not able to work at full capacity and could not
make her payments.  She now has the ability to make payments on her tax lien, and believes that
lingering obligations from her two mortgage accounts have been cancelled.  “It is her aim to find
sufficient documentary evidence to determine the status of those two debts.”  Id.  She has the
motivation, intention, and financial ability to address her remaining debts and has articulated a
reasonable strategy for resolving her financial problems.
Discussion
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s decision fails to consider important aspects of
the case that are not consistent with his favorable findings.  He argues that the Judge did not
consider the underlying circumstances of Applicant’s debts, that he did not seriously analyze the
paucity of corroborating evidence for some of Applicant’s claims, and that he failed to evaluate the
evidence as a cumulative whole.  We find Department Counsel’s argument to be persuasive.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
3
The significance of delinquent debts to the security clearance process is explained in the
Directive:
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  Directive,
Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 18.
Accordingly, in evaluating a case under Guideline F, a Judge should consider the extent to which
an applicant’s poor financial circumstances cast doubt upon his or her judgment, self control, and
other characteristics essential to protecting national security information.  See ISCR Case No. 15-
01737 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14,  2017).
Regarding the tax lien, Applicant sold a rental house for a substantial gain of over $350,000. 
As Department Counsel notes, it is not clear what she did with all of the proceeds.  She testified she
owed “four something” ($400,000 plus) on the property that was sold. No documents in the record
corroborate that testimony. Apparently, she paid none of the tax on her capital gain. As we have
previously stated, someone who fails to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying taxes when
due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted
access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02884 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2018). 
See Cafeteria and Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir.
1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).  
The Judge found the tax lien to have been mitigated because Applicant had made an overture
to the IRS seeking a payment plan.  However, despite her having been employed for well over a year
prior to the close of the record, Applicant had not secured a payment plan or otherwise established
a track record regarding payment of her tax obligation.  As it stands, Applicant’s case for mitigation
of this particular concern is no more than a promise to resolve the debt in the future, which is not
sufficient to establish mitigation within the meaning of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
04565 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2015) (Promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially
responsible manner).  Under the facts of this case, the Judge’s favorable resolution of this allegation
is not sustainable.
Department Counsel also draws our attention to difficulties with the Judge’s treatment of the
two mortgage debts described above.  In effect, Department Counsel states that there is a paucity
of evidence to establish mitigation of these two allegations.  We note first of all that, in a DOHA
proceeding, the applicant bears the burden of persuasion that he or she should have a clearance. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  As we stated above, we evaluate an applicant’s success in establishing
mitigation with reference to the standard in Egan, supra.  We also note the Judge’s finding that the
status of these debts is unclear.  That alone impugns his favorable conclusion that the debts had been
resolved through debt forgiveness, as Applicant contended.  After all, if it is not clear whether the
debt is still owed, there is no basis to find that in fact it is not owed.  Indeed, the Judge gave
4
Applicant an opportunity to provide a 1099-C or some other evidence that the debt was no longer
owed, yet Applicant failed to provide anything regarding the mortgage debts.2  The Judge stated, in
his whole-person analysis, that Applicant was determined to ascertain the status of these debts,
although efforts that post-date the Decision itself are of no mitigating significance.  Accordingly,
we conclude that the Judge erred in finding that Applicant had established resolution of these two
debts within the meaning of the Directive.
Moreover, as Department Counsel argues, the Judge’s favorable findings are vitiated by his
failure seriously to address the circumstances underlying these two mortgage debts.  Indeed, even
if an applicant has actually paid  his or her debts, or they have been removed through a process such
as debt forgiveness, a Judge may still consider the circumstances underlying the debts for what they
may reveal about the applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  By the same token, even if debts have
been resolved or discharged, a Judge may consider any paucity of mitigating evidence in
determining whether the applicant had met his or her burden of persuasion.    See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 16-02246 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2017). 
As Department Counsel argues, Applicant acquired various rental properties without
possessing the experience or training to manage them properly.3  We note she permitted the
properties in question to go into foreclosure in a year in which her overall income–salary plus capital
gain from sale of another house–was nearly $450,000.  We also note that she testified that she owed
money on the property.  However, she provided no corroboration.4  That she sought foreclosure
rather than payment undermines any mitigation that arose from circumstances that were outside her
control.  The Judge himself noted in the Analysis section of the Decision that Applicant has enough
funds to pay off her debts.  That she has not been able to demonstrate resolution of her financial
delinquencies undermines a conclusion that she has mitigated concerns about her judgment and
reliability that arise from them.  The Judge’s favorable findings regarding these first and second
mortgage obligations are not sustainable.
We are persuaded by Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge not only failed to
address the issues discussed above, but that he also failed to consider the record evidence a whole,
thereby impairing his whole-person analysis.  Had he done so, he would have addressed in some
detail the cumulative interaction of Applicant’s ongoing, unresolved tax liability and her failure to
2Applicant testified that she did not receive 1099s, although she expected to.  “I just have documentation from
the Courts that the house went into foreclosure.”  Tr. at 63.  This undermines whatever favorable significance the Judge
appears to have extended to Applicant’s claim that she would continue to seek evidence that the mortgage debts had been
forgiven.  
3Department Counsel argues that “[w]ithout proper education and expertise, Applicant . . . thought she could
[overextend] her finances, beat the market, and be successful.  This was extremely poor judgment.”  Appeal Brief at 11. 
The extent of Applicant’s formal or experiential expertise in real estate transactions is not explicitly developed in the
record.  However, given the circumstances, it is a reasonable inference that Applicant lacked the requisite know-how
to manage numerous real estate holdings of the value set forth in the record.
4Applicant Exhibit E is an Amended U.S. Individual Tax Return.  This document, prepared by her CPA, states
that Applicant’s adjusted gross income for 2013 was $448,071.  
5
present evidence that the two mortgage debts have been satisfactorily put to rest.  Of course, an
applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or
simultaneously.  However, an applicant must act responsibly given his or her circumstances and
develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions
which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See, e.g., ISCR Case No.15-02903 at 3 (App.
Bd. Mar. 9, 2017).  The record does not support a conclusion that Applicant has satisfied this
requirement.  
After considering Department Counsel’s arguments in light of the entirety of the record
evidence, we conclude that the Judge failed to consider important aspects of the case and that his
favorable findings run contrary to the weight of the record evidence.  Accordingly, the Judge’s
favorable decision is not sustainable.
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
