 
1 
  
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 16-02226 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s sister and brother-in-
law are citizens and residents of the People’s Republic of China (China). His mother-in-
law, sister-in-law, and daughter-in-law are citizens of China residing in the United States. 
Applicant’s family connections to his sister and brother-in-law in China are close and 
continuing. China aggressively seeks classified and protected information from the United 
States. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,2 on March 8, 2017, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
                                                          
1 Applicant is also known as . 
 
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
Guideline B, foreign influence. On March 31, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and 
elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. On May 17, 2017, Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained five attachments 
(Items). On June 5, 2017, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to object to the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. On June 6, 2017, Applicant 
responded to the FORM. His response was admitted into the record without objection as 
Item A. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.3 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to the People’s 
Republic of China. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used 
for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 
2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 
10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 
(3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts 
that are either well known or from government reports. Administrative notice was taken 
of the foreign influence security concerns posed by China. Portions of the Department 
Counsel’s administrative notice request are quoted without quotation marks and footnotes 
in the China section of this decision, infra. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted his sister and brother-in-law are 
citizens and residents of China, but denied the security concern as to their citizenship and 
residence. The SOR also alleged his mother was a citizen and resident of China, 
however, she died in 2015. He also denied the security concern as to the citizenship of 
his mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and daughter-in-law who are Chinese citizens living in the 
                                                          
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
United States. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old senior database administrator who has worked for a 
defense contractor since March 2008. He seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) 
He has been married since September 1985 and has one son age 31. His wife, a senior 
software engineer, is a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Taiwan and works for a 
defense contractor. (Item 2) His son was born in the United States and attended a private 
college in the United States. (Item 2) Applicant and his wife own two homes in the United 
States worth approximately one million dollars. (Item 2)  
Applicant was born in China in 1966. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering in China. In 1986, at age 35, both he and his wife moved to the United States. 
He came to pursue a master’s degree. (Item 2) In 1999, they became naturalized U.S. 
citizens. In 2008, 2011, and 2012, he visited China for a period of 11 to 20 days on each 
trip. In 2013, he visited China for one to five days. The 2008, 2012, and 2013 trips were 
to visit his mother in a nursing home. In 2013, he also visited his sister in China for a 
period of one to five days. 
Applicant’s brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen living in the United States. (Item 3) 
The record is silent as to how much contact Applicant has with his brother, but he had 
yearly contact with his brother’s wife from 1993 to June 2014. (Item 4) He has had no 
contact with her since 2014. (Item 4) Applicant’s older sister has been an art school 
principal and is a citizen and resident of Singapore. (Item 2, 3) His other sister is a citizen 
and resident of China. Before retiring ten years ago, his sister was a clerk at a construction 
company. His brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of China who worked as an electrical 
engineer at a ship equipment company before retiring three years ago. (Item 2, 3) 
Applicant asserts his relatives in China have sound financial resources, and he does not 
expect to provide them with financial assistance. (Item 2)  
Until March 1986, when Applicant left China, he had daily contact with his sister 
who is a citizen and resident of China. (Item 4) Between March 1986 and April 1995, he 
had no in-person contact with his sister. And from April 1995 to March 2014, he had yearly 
contact with his sister. Starting in 2011, he began email contact with his sister and since 
October 2014, he has had monthly email contact with his sister. He had in-person contact 
with her when he visited China and also when she visited the United States in March 
2014. (Item 4) Applicant had contact with his brother-in-law during their five-day stay in 
the United States, but has no direct contact with him since that time. (Item 4) 
In 2011, Applicant stopped his monthly telephone contact with his sister in 
Singapore and started email communication with her. (Item 4) In December 2013, he had 
in-person contact with her during his five-day stay in Singapore. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is 87 and worked as a chemical engineer before retiring. 
(Item 2, 3) She is a Chinese citizen living in the United States. From 1996 to April 2010, 
Applicant had in-person contact with her two or three times a year when he visited China. 
(Item 4) The record is silent as to his contact with his mother-in-law since she moved to 
 
4 
the United States. In 1993, his sister-in-law came to the United States and is a U.S. 
permanent resident. She currently resides with his brother in the United States. (Item 2, 
3) Before she retired, she worked as a bank clerk. In 2014, Applicant’s daughter-in-law 
married Applicant’s son. (Item 2) She is a Chinese citizen living in the United States. She 
obtained her master’s degree in engineering from a U.S. university. (Item 2) Applicant 
has weekly contact with her. (Item 4) Applicant asserts none of his relatives ever worked 
or were affiliated with either the Chinese or any other foreign government. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant maintains a bank account in China with a balance of approximately 
$4,516. When his mother was alive, he brought some gifts to his relatives living in China. 
They insisted in paying him back in Yuan, the official Chinese currency. Since he could 
not use Yuan in the United States, and since the amount was small, he simply deposited 
it in a Chinese bank tor his use the next time he visited China. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant came to the United States 30 years ago as a student with all his 
belongings in two suit cases. He asserts he loves the United States and no foreign 
influences would make him betray the country who gives him prosperity and the chances 
to realize my American Dream. (Item 2) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s work performance has been outstanding. (Ex. A) He received a 
company award in recognition of his outstanding performance and dedication. (Ex. A)  
 
China 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as the 
most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail. 
 
In assessing the military and security developments in China, the U.S. Department 
of Defense has reported that: 
 
Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of economic 
espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information will 
continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. 
economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with continuing technological 
advances in the global information environment. 
 
In the long term, Chinese leaders are focused on developing the capabilities they 
deem necessary to deter or defeat adversary power projection and counter third-part[ies] 
including U.S.-intervention during a crisis or conflict. China’s military modernization is 
producing capabilities that have the potential to reduce core U.S. military technological 
advantages. 
 
5 
China very likely uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches 
that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security and export-
restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials unobtainable through 
other means. 
 
In 2015, numerous computer systems around the world, including those owned by 
the U.S. Government, continued to be targeted for intrusions, some of which appear to 
be attributable directly to China’s Government and military. These and past intrusions 
were focused on accessing networks and exfiltrating information. 
 
China is using its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against the 
U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support U.S. national 
defense programs. The information targeted could potentially be used to benefit China’s 
defense industry, high-technology industries, and provide [China] insights into U.S. 
leadership perspectives on key China issues. Additionally, targeted information could 
inform Chinese military planners’ work to build a picture of U.S. defense networks, 
logistics, and related military capabilities that could be exploited during a crisis. 
 
China uses state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the 
level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, development, 
and acquisition. 
 
The organizational network of China’s military-industrial complex is such that the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use technologies or 
knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development. 
 
As recently as March 2016, for instance, a Chinese national pleaded guilty to 
participating in a conspiracy, between approximately October 2008 through March 2014, 
to hack into the computer networks of major U.S. defense contractors, steal sensitive 
military—including data relating to military aircraft that are indispensable in keeping our 
military personnel safe--and export-controlled data, and send the stolen data to China. 
 
China has in place a long-term, comprehensive military modernization program 
designed to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity 
regional conflicts and, as China’s global footprint and international interests grow, its 
military modernization program has become progressively more focused on investments 
for a range of missions beyond China’s periphery. 
 
There are also numerous examples of individuals who have been convicted of 
conspiring to violate federal export control laws by illegally exporting defense equipment 
to China, of which only the most recent is cited here. Most recently, in June 2016, a 
California resident was convicted in a federal district court of conspiring to illegally export 
fighter jet engines and unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) and related technical data to 
China, in violation of the Arms Export Control Act. 
 
 
6 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission has reported: 
 
Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-scale 
cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a range of U.S. 
networks, including those of DoD, defense contractors, and private enterprises. China’s 
material incentives for continuing this activity are immense and unlikely to be altered by 
small-scale U.S. actions. 
 
China’s progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to China’s 
substantial and sustained investment in defense research and development (R&D). 
China’s large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary 
information also has allowed China to fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and 
commercial R&D. 
 
Since the 1990s, China has promoted “civil-military integration” to facilitate the 
transfer of commercial technologies for military use. As part of this effort, China has 
encouraged civilian enterprises to participate in military R&D and production, sponsored 
research into dual-use science and technology, and developed common military and 
civilian technical standards. 
 
With the emergence of a more modern and able domestic defense industrial base, 
China is gradually shifting its focus from purchasing complete foreign systems to 
procuring foreign military and dual-use subsystems and components via open sources, 
trade, and traditional and nontraditional espionage. Among China’s most effective 
methods used to acquire sensitive U.S. technology are cyber espionage; witting and 
unwitting collection by Chinese students, scholars, and scientists; joint ventures; and 
foreign cooperation. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2015, the U.S. 
Department of State reported: 
 
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in which the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members hold almost 
all top government and security apparatus positions. 
 
Repression and coercion markedly increased during the year, particularly against 
organizations and individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and public 
interest and ethnic minority issues, and against lawyers and law firms that took on 
sensitive cases. 
 
Human rights concerns that were observed during 2015 also included: extralegal 
measures to prevent public expression of critical opinions; repression of speech, religion, 
association, assembly and movement for certain minorities; extrajudicial killings; enforced 
disappearance and incommunicado detention, including prolonged detentions at 
 
7 
unofficial holding facilities (black jails); torture and coerced confessions of prisoners; 
detention and harassment of individuals who sought to peacefully exercise their rights 
under the law; a lack of due process in judicial proceedings; searches of premises without 
warrants; monitoring of communications (including telephone conversations, facsimile 
transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communications); opening of 
domestic and international mail; failure to respect freedom of speech and the press; 
severe restrictions on peaceful assembly, as well as severe restrictions on citizens’ 
freedom of association. Additionally, citizens lacked the right to change their government 
and had limited forms of redress against the government.  
 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and 
personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched without 
knowledge or consent.  
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The applicant has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
8 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
9 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Taiwan and works 
for a U.S. defense contractor. His son was born in the United States. His brother is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen living in the United States. His older sister is a citizen and resident 
of Singapore. His other sister is a citizen and resident of China as is her husband, his 
brother-in-law. Applicant has monthly email contact with his sister in China. His contact 
with his daughter-in-law, a Chinese citizen living in the United States, is frequent. 
However, his contact with his mother-in-law and sister-in-law, both living in the United 
States, is minimal.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in China could result in a security concern. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of close family 
members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its human rights 
abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign family 
contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).  
 
Applicant relationship with his sister in China creates a concern about Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help his sister 
living in China. For example, if intelligence officials, or other entities in China, wanted to 
expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his sister living in China. 
Applicant would then be subject to coercion through his connections to China and 
classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
Applicant’s ties with his sister living in China, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying 
under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his spouse has a close relationship with 
even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 
99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
 
10 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States, places a significant, but not an 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship 
with his sister living in China does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist his sister in China. 
  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from China 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
sister and brother-in-law living in China, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. Applicant’s relationships with his sister living in China create a 
potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist his sister in China by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
Additionally, Applicant maintains less than $5,000 in a bank in China. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
11 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has contact with his sister 
living in China. They communicate using email and Chinese intelligence officials are 
known to monitor email. Loyalty to, support for, and connections to family are positive 
character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same relationships and 
Applicant’s specialized education and background negate the possibility of full mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is 
little likelihood that his relationships with his sister in China could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant, his spouse, and son are citizens and 
residents of the United States. China does not recognize dual citizenship, and Applicant’s 
son is solely a citizen of the United States. When Applicant volunteered to assist the U.S. 
Government as a contractor, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
 
12 
United States over all other countries. He has significate financial assets in the United 
States and minimal assets in China. AG ¶ 8(f) has limited applicability as to Applicant’s 
financial assets. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family living in China. There 
is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his sister living in 
China to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.4 As such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or his sister living in China would be specifically selected 
as targets for improper coercion or exploitation.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s sister living in China could become potential targets because of Applicant’s 
support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
could theoretically add some risk to them from intelligence elements in China. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with anyone living in China. Applicant is not required to report his 
contacts with citizens or residents of China. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to his bank account in China. The bank account with assets of 
about $5,000 is insignificant compared to his property in the United States valued at about 
one million dollars. He is credited with mitigation of SOR ¶ 1.c  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to is sister living in China are sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern. His contact with his daughter-in-law living in the United States 
is frequent. He has infrequent contacts with his mother-in-law and sister-in-law are 
citizens of China, but are living in the United States and pose minimal security concern. 
Applicant traveled to China in 2008, 2011, 2012, and 2013. Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States; however, these connections are not sufficient to 
overcome his connection to his sister living in China. Foreign influence security concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
4 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant before that 
applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.  
 
13 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline B are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was born in China in 1951. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering in China. In 1986, at age 35, both he and his wife moved to the United States, 
where he pursued and obtained a master’s degree. In 1999, he and his wife became 
naturalized U.S. citizens. In 2008, 2011, 2012, and 2013 he visited China. His only relative 
who is a citizen and resident of China is his sister. He asserted he would never allow a 
foreign influence to make him betray this country, 
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017) the Appeal Board 
considered a Guideline B case involving a U.S. citizen with family members in China and 
commented: 
 
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved 
and the intelligence gathering history of that government are among the 
important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence 
and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the 
case. The country’s human rights record is another important consideration. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006). There is a rational 
connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests 
are adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to 
protect and safeguard classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-
07436 at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011). 
 
We note record evidence and the Judge’s findings of the following: 
Applicant’s parents reside in China; Applicant communicates with them 
frequently; Applicant has visited them or they her on a regular basis; 
Applicant’s parents are aware of the location and general nature of her 
work; China practices espionage against the U.S.; and China has used its 
cyber-espionage capability to compromise DoD and contractor computer 
systems. This evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s 
parents could become a means through which Applicant could come to the 
 
14 
attention of Chinese intelligence personnel and be subjected to coercion or 
pressure.  
 
There are some factual differences between Applicant’s case, and ISCR Case No. 
15-00528 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017); however, the issues of security concern in that case 
and Applicant’s case are similar. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00042 (App. Bd. July 6, 
2016) (denial of security clearance due to connections to China affirmed); ISCR Case No. 
14-03200 (App. Bd. July 16, 2015) (same); ISCR Case No. 12-04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 
13, 2013) (stating “The PRC’s history of conducting espionage against the United States 
puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant that he was unable to meet because of his ties 
to his relatives who are PRC citizens and residents.”). 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence 
to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. By failing to 
provide such information, financial considerations security concerns remain. Because 
Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am unable to evaluate his 
demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to his truthfulness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:   
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B, Foreign Influence:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
15 
 
 
