KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline H; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant states that he does not remember receiving Department Counsel’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) and, if he had received it, he would have responded to it.  The record
reflects that a copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant on April 11, 2017, and he signed a
receipt for it on April 16, 2017.  He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file
objections and submit additional matters.  In a document dated June 12, 2017, this case was
forwarded for assignment of a Judge and noted Applicant did not submit a response to the
FORM.  From our review of the record, Applicant was not denied any due process rights.
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03639.a1
DATE: 08/28/2018
DATE: August 28, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03639
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 2, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On June 1, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a Federal contractor.  After disclosing in a security
clearance application (SCA) that he used marijuana monthly from 1998 to 2001, he was granted a
security clearance in 2006.  In 2016, he completed another SCA in which he disclosed that he was
arrested for leaving the scene of an accident after consuming alcohol in February 2016 and was
arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in March 2016.  As a result of those arrests,
he was convicted of leaving the scene of the accident and of a reduced charge of failure to submit
to alcohol testing.  In the later SCA, he also disclosed using marijuana monthly from 1997 to 2007
and then occasionally until 2014.1  He decided to stop using marijuana because of the ages of his
children.  He acknowledges that his 2006 SCA may have inaccurate information about his drug use,
but those inaccuracies were not done deliberately and were based on his best recollection when
completing the SCA.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s 17-year history of drug use is disqualifying.  While his last reported use of
marijuana occurred two years ago, the passage of time does not mitigate such conduct.  He has not
submitted a signed statement of intent.  “Given his pattern of disregard of federal law and his
responsibilities as a clearance holder, Applicant’s promises to abstain from future marijuana use
carry little weight.”  Decision at 4.
Applicant was convicted of two alcohol-related crimes in 2016.  When considered in
combination with his illegal drug use, he has demonstrated a pattern of poor judgment.  He has
shown a disregard for the law and has not presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
Applicant’s 2006 and 2016 SCAs contain inconsistencies about his marijuana use for the
period covered in both applications.  His claim that his disclosures in his 2006 SCA were his best
1 In the decision, the Judge noted that Applicant listed the date “1007" instead of “2007" in his 2016 SCA and
acknowledged that typographical error in a subsequent background interview.  Decision at 2, n.5, citing Government
Exhibit 4. 
2
recollection at the time is not credible.  It is unlikely his memory improved over time.  His 2006
disclosures were not due to an inaccurate memory, but were intentional and material misstatements. 
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s adverse falsification findings.  He states that there were
extended periods when he did not use marijuana, and he tried to be as transparent as possible.  The
Judge’s findings about the inconsistencies in Applicant’s disclosures of his marijuana use in his
2006 and 2016 SCAs are supported by substantial evidence, that is, “such relevant evidence as a
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See also ISCR Case No. 16-04094 at 2 (App.
Bd. Apr. 20, 2018).  In her analysis, the Judge logically concluded that Applicant’s more extensive
disclosure in his later SCA of his marijuana use during the overlapping period was evidence that he
intentionally falsified the earlier SCA.  The Judge’s adverse falsification findings are sustainable. 
In his appeal brief, Applicant states that he does not remember receiving Department
Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) and, if he had received it, he would have responded
to it.  The record reflects that a copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant on April 11, 2017, and
he signed a receipt for it on April 16, 2017.  He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file
objections and submit additional matters.  In a document dated June 12, 2017, this case was
forwarded for assignment of a Judge and noted Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. 
From our review of the record, Applicant was not denied any due process rights provided in
Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  
  
Applicant also indicated that he did not know that he had the option of submitting a
statement of intent to abstain from future drug use.2  In her decision, the Judge noted that Applicant
was provided a complete copy of the Directive when the FORM was submitted to him.  Although
pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely, reasonable
steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jun. 30, 2014).   
Applicant further argues, among other matters, that he has not used drugs in over four years,
that he has no desire to do so in the future, that he is ashamed of his conduct, and that he has been
open and honest about these matters.  These arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence and are not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a
manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4
(App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  Applicant also requests that we contact his character references.  The
2 Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 26(b) states: “the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of
abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of
national security eligibility[.]”
3
Appeal Board, however, has no authority to interview witnesses, conduct investigations, or make
findings of fact.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-03072 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2018).  
Applicant has failed to establish that the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor  of the national
security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
