 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  16-03218 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 26, 2015. On 
June 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant 
answered (Answer) the SOR on August 24, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on November 9, 2017, and 
the case was assigned to me on March 16, 2018. On April 26, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
May 23, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted, without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D were admitted, without 
objection.1 I received the completed transcript (TR) on June 8, 2018. I held the record 
open until July 16, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. He timely 
submitted AE E through AE I, which are admitted without objection.  
                                                          
1 On October 19, 2017, a discovery package was sent to Applicant. I marked that as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I, but did not admit it into evidence. 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and works as an information technology specialist for a 
defense contractor. He has worked for his employer for approximately two years, and 
requires a clearance for his employment. He has held a DOD security clearance since 
approximately 1989. He and his ex-wife separated in 2010, and their divorce was finalized 
in 2013, after 17 years of marriage. He has two adult children. He received his bachelor’s 
degree in 2009 and his master’s degree in June 2016. He honorably retired from the U.S. 
Air Force in 2010, after 21 years of service. (TR at 9-13) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial issues to his 2013 divorce, loss of employment in 
July 2013, and the subsequent failure of his business. (TR at 24, 44; AE C) The SOR 
alleges five debts, totaling $67,079. 
 
In July 2013, Applicant was laid off by his employer. A month later, Applicant 
started a transportation business with $18,000 in savings. He used his personal credit to 
purchase a $51,000 truck for the business. The business experienced numerous 
setbacks due to circumstances beyond his control, which limited his ability to make the 
monthly payments of $1,030. From the fall of 2013 until April 2015, when the vehicle was 
repossessed, Applicant’s business generated approximately $8,000 in total revenue. (TR 
at 23, 25, 27-31, 66) Following the repossession, Applicant was indebted to Creditor A 
for the outstanding balance of $30,468.  
 
After the vehicle was repossessed, Creditor A transferred the debt to Creditor B. 
In February 2018, Applicant contacted Creditor B and offered, in writing, to settle the debt 
for $7,000. (TR at 34-43,) On July 6, 2018, Applicant sent an additional offer to settle the 
debt. On July 17, 2018, he paid $10,000 to Creditor B and resolved the debt. (AE F; AE 
I)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a duplicate of the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
The debt was a joint credit card account of Applicant and his ex-wife. In October 2012, 
Applicant established payment arrangements and made payments of $250 until June 
2014, totaling $4,250. (AE G). He was unable to continue to make payments due to a lack 
of revenue from his business. In May 2018, Applicant established a new payment 
agreement of $200 per month, and he has made two payments. (TR at 46-47, 49-52, 73-
74; AE G; AE I) 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are both accounts that belonged to his 
ex-wife. He was unaware of these accounts, but his credit bureau reports reflect that he 
was an authorized user. He did not make charges to either account. (TR at 52, 74; GE 3 
at 4-5; AE B) Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h, and they were 
removed from his credit report. (TR at 55-58, 74-76; AE D). In his Answer, Applicant 
provided documentation showing the $2,047 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was paid in 2014. 
(TR at 57, 75; AE A)  
 
Applicant resolved additional debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He also 
worked to prevent his home from going into foreclosure status. (TR at 44-45, 77) Applicant 
 
3 
 
provided documentation showing his current finances are in good standing; he has no 
new delinquent debts; he follows a budget; and he has savings. (TR at 67, 70; AE D) 
Applicant also provided a letter of recommendation from his supervisor reflecting his 
reputation for integrity, exceptionalism, and professionalism. (AE C) He has never had 
any security violations. (TR at 60) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.2  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence establish two disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant experienced personal financial issues related to his employment and 
divorce, which were circumstances beyond his control. In 2010, he retired after 21 years 
of military service. Additionally, he and his wife of 17 years separated. In 2013, they 
divorced and he was laid off from his job. As a result, he took a reasonable and calculated 
risk to start a business. He had savings and a military pension. The business was not 
financially successful. Applicant provided proof that he has resolved or is making 
payments toward his delinquent debts. His actions demonstrate a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors. Applicant has resolved the debts alleged in the SOR and is able to live 
with-in his budget. He has no new delinquent debts, demonstrating his circumstances 
have changed and he is reliable. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) was 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. He successfully disputed two of the SOR debts; two of the debts belong 
to his ex-wife; he resolved one debt in 2014 and one debt in 2018; and he is making 
payments toward one debt. I also considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence 
and letter of recommendation. 
 
Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. He mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns and established his eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
It is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the United States to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
