1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03862 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq.  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concern stemming from his contacts in South Korea. Accordingly, 
this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised a security concern under Guideline B for foreign influence.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2017, and requested a hearing to establish 
his eligibility for access to classified information. 
  
 On July 5, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing, and the exhibits offered by the Government and by 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
Applicant at the hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. 
(Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, B, and C.) The transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) was received on July 12, 2018.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4) establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”2 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.3 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).4 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were then in effect. My decision and formal findings 
under the revised Guideline B would not be different under the 2006 Guideline.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            The SOR alleged under Guideline B that (1) Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-
in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea; and (2) Applicant maintains contact with 
extended family members who are citizens and residents of South Korea, one of whom 
is a logistician in the South Korean military.5 Applicant admitted that his mother-in-law 
and father-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea. Applicant admitted that his 
brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of South Korea, that he retired from the South 
Korean military in July 2016, and now is an administrative official for a South Korean 
defense acquisition program.6  
 
             Applicant was born in the United States, is 35 years old, married with two sons, 
both born in the United States (ages five and one and one-half).7 He holds a bachelor’s 
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
5 SOR ¶ 1.  
 
6 Answer, p. 2.   
 
7 GE 1; Tr. 29. 
 
3 
 
and a master’s degree from an American university. Since May 2012, Applicant has been 
employed by a defense contractor.8  
 
          Applicant’s spouse was born in South Korea and became a naturalized United 
States citizen in 2013. She came to the United States to pursue her doctoral degree from 
the same university where Applicant was pursuing his master’s degree; that’s where they 
met in 2006. They married in 2009. Since 2010, Applicant’s spouse has worked as a 
professional in a federal public health agency.9  Since September 2014, Applicant and 
his family have lived in a home he and his spouse own.10 Excluding any equity in their 
home, Applicant and his spouse have just under a half million dollars in assets.11 For tax 
year 2016, Applicant and his spouse reported $182,349 in adjusted gross income.12 
Applicant’s latest credit score is in the top quintile.13  
 
         Applicant’s mother (age 65) was born in Vietnam. His father (age 59) was born in 
Hong Kong. Applicant’s sister (age 43) was born in Vietnam.14 They are all naturalized 
United States citizens and live in the United States. Applicant’s father has worked for the 
federal government for 33 years, and Applicant’s sister has served in the United States 
military since 1993.15 
 
          Applicant testified about his in-laws in South Korea. His father-in-law (age 73) is 
self-employed in the home security business, serving commercial entities and individual 
homes. He has never worked for the South Korean government. Applicant’s mother-in-
law does not work outside the home.16  
 
           As noted, one of Applicant’s brothers-in-law did serve in the South Korean military 
as a logistician, but by the time the SOR was issued he had retired (in July 2016) and 
was employed by a South Korean defense acquisition program. Applicant believed that 
in that position his brother-in-law was doing in a civilian capacity what he did while in the 
military, handling food, equipment, and supplies.17 In April 2018, Applicant’s spouse 
                                                          
8 GE 1.  
 
9 Answer, pp. 1-2; AE B; Tr. 10-12. Applicant’s spouse has a public trust clearance. Id. 27. 
 
10 GE 1.  
 
11 AE C. 
 
12 Answer (Attachment 3).  
 
13 AE C.  
 
14 GE 1. 
 
15 Answer, p. 1.   
 
16 Tr. 14, 24.  
 
17 Tr. 14-16, 24-25. Applicant’s other brother-in-law works for a telecomm company, but Applicant did not 
know specifically what he did for that company. Id. 22-23.  
4 
 
learned in a telephone call with her mother that Applicant’s retired brother-in-law had 
suffered a stroke. His ability to communicate is poor, and he needs around-the-clock care. 
Applicant testified that his brother-in-law is unable to work and will likely remain disabled 
for the foreseeable future.18 
 
            Applicant testified about his contacts with his in-laws. In twelve years, he has been 
to South Korea four times, the last time was just after his youngest son was born. 
Applicant had never been to South Korea before he met his wife.19 Before her brother 
had his stroke, Applicant’s spouse telephoned her mother about every two weeks. Since 
the stroke, she calls more frequently to check on her brother’s condition. Because 
Applicant cannot converse very well in the Korean language, his spouse does most of the 
talking. His sons understand some of what their grandmother is saying, but cannot answer 
her back.20 Neither he nor his spouse have any business interests or property interests 
in South Korea.  
 
            Applicant and his family fully intend to stay in the state where they now live and 
own a home. He and his spouse have already established prepaid college trusts for their 
sons. Applicant has no plan to relocate to South Korea. He never lived in South Korea 
and has never been to that country except for personal travel. To relocate his family to 
South Korea “isn’t even a consideration.”21  
 
             Applicant submitted eight character reference letters. He is uniformly described 
as demonstrating “a high level of integrity, trustworthiness, and responsibility.” Others 
respect him as being “hardworking, dependable, and talented.” Two other authors who 
hold Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information clearances endorsed him as “an 
excellent candidate for the high-level security he requires to perform his duties.”22 
 
Administrative Notice (Republic of South Korea) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about South Korea:23 
 
South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea, is a self-governing state located in 
the southern part of the peninsula of Korea. The United States and South Korea share a 
long history of friendship and cooperation based on shared values and interests. The two 
countries work together to combat regional and global threats and to strengthen their 
                                                          
 
18 Tr. 17-18, 25-26.  
 
19 Tr. 13-14,  
 
20 Tr. 15-16, 22. 
 
21 Tr. 20. 
 
22 AE B, pp. 2, 5, 7. 
 
23 GE 2.   
5 
 
economies. South Korea is now the United States’ sixth-largest trading partner with a 
trillion-dollar economy. The longstanding relationship between the United States and 
South Korea has brought positive rewards to the U.S. economy including more job 
opportunities for American. 
 
The South Korean government has generally respected the human rights of its 
citizens. Human rights problems, however, have been reported including: the 
government’s interpretations of national security and other laws limiting freedom of 
expression and restricting access to the internet; official corruption; the lack of 
comprehensive antidiscrimination laws; sexual and domestic violence; child prostitution; 
and trafficking in persons.  
 
South Korea is one of the seven countries most actively engaged in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States. Although South 
Korea is considered an ally, it has been the unauthorized recipient of technology 
controlled under U.S. export control laws, including material that could be used in missile 
delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data and infrared 
detectors and camera engines. Industrial espionage remains a high profile concern 
relating to South Korea and South Korean companies. In July 2014, a South Korean 
chemical company agreed to pay a criminal penalty of over two million dollars to resolve 
an investigation into the company’s attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade secrets 
regarding a meta-aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, and 
lightweight structural support for aircraft. Sources have also reported that South Korea 
may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters that it 
purchased. 
  
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
6 
 
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. 
interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the country 
in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect classified 
7 
 
or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if 
that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.  
 
The guideline also notes several conditions in AG ¶ 8 that could mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human- rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Because Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and 
residents of South Korea, which has a record of engaging in foreign economic collection 
and industrial espionage against the United States, AG ¶ 7(a) applies . Applicant’s 
South Korean familial relationships also make AG ¶¶ 7 (b) and (e) applicable.  The next 
inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the United States. His parents and 
only sibling are naturalized U.S. citizens. His sibling has served in our armed forces since 
1993. Applicant’s spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His two sons were born in the U.S. 
Applicant and his spouse are financially well off and have significant assets here in 
addition to their home. Since 2010, his spouse has worked for a federal public health 
agency in a position of public trust. Applicant’s only connection to South Korea is by virtue 
of his spouse, who was born in South Korea, and whose parents and two brothers are 
8 
 
citizens and residents of South Korea. His father-in-law is self-employed in the private 
sector and has not worked for the South Korean government.  Applicant and his spouse 
have no property or other assets in South Korea. Applicant and his spouse have no 
intention of relocating to South Korea. Applicant and his spouse have traveled to South 
Korea four times in the last 12 years.  
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law served in the South Korean military and retired in July 
2016. He took a South Korean government position when he retired, doing much the 
same work he did while in the military. In April of this year, that brother-in-law had a 
stroke, lost much of his ability to communicate, is in rehabilitation, and is likely to remain 
so for the foreseeable future.24 Applicant’s spouse calls her mother frequently to keep 
abreast of her brother’s condition. Because Applicant knows very little of the Korean 
language, he speaks rarely to his mother-in-law.   
 
Applicant’s numerous character reference letters portray him as having integrity, 
and being trustworthy, dependable, and an excellent candidate for a high-level security 
clearance. Applicant and his family have deep roots in the United States. Faced with any 
conflict posed by his South Korean family members, Applicant’s deep and longstanding 
loyalties to the U.S. are such that he would resolve any conflict in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) apply.  
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.25 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):         For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:          For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
24 Applicant’s other brother-in-law works in the telecomm industry, but Applicant knows no specifics about 
his job.  
 
25 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
