1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00677 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances largely beyond his control, Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties. However, Applicant is resolving all his remaining delinquent accounts 
through Chapter 13 Bankruptcy and has mitigated the potential financial security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on December 30, 
2015. On April 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 15, 2017, and the case was 
assigned to me on May 26, 2017. On November 9, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for November 28, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. Applicant called one 
witness. I kept the record open until February 15, 2018, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX C and D, which I have admitted without 
objection. Additionally, Applicant submitted by email an update on his financial status on 
March 12, 2018. I have admitted this email as AX E. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on December 6, 2017. 
 
While this decision was pending, the DOD implemented the amended AG on June 
8, 2017. This decision is based on the amended AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 49, is a change-management analyst currently employed by a Federal 
contractor since April 2015. He has worked as a Federal contractor since June 2011. He 
served honorably in the U.S. Air Force from October 1987 until August 2011. He was first 
granted a security clearance in about 1988. He and his wife married in 2001, separated 
in 2014, and have a 16-year-old daughter. (Tr. 26; GX 1; Tr. 35-36.)  
 
The SOR alleges four debts totaling approximately $25,507, three charged-off 
debts with unspecified balances, and a 2001 Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. Applicant admits 
each of these allegations. The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s February 2017 
and January 2016 credit bureau reports (CBR), and discussed on his e-QIP and during 
his personal subject interview (PSI). (GX 4; GX 3; GX 1; GX 2.) Applicant’s admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant listed the three SOR debts that he was aware of on his e-QIP in 2015. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h.) In early 2017, Applicant contacted a debt-consolidation 
company and a credit-restoration company in an effort to manage his debts. He worked 
with the credit restoration company for several months, but did not find their approach to 
debt resolution to be effective. He then determined that he needed to discuss his financial 
situation and options with an attorney. He contacted his current attorney and began the 
process of filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2017. Applicant filed his Chapter 13 
petition in January 2018. The remaining unresolved SOR debts, including the 2014 tax 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) and the balance for the voluntarily repossessed vehicle (SOR ¶ 1.c), 
are included in his repayment plan which is $1,100 per month for 57 months. (Tr. 93-96; 
AX E.) Applicant’s past financial difficulties and the status of each of the SOR debts is 
discussed below. 
 
Applicant was stationed overseas from 1994 until 1998. When he and his then-
wife returned to the United States, Applicant encountered an increased cost of living. 
3 
 
Additionally, he bought a house and financed the furnishings and other necessities 
primarily through credit cards. Applicant divorced in 2000, and filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
in early 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.a), due to significant marital debt. (Tr. 40-41; GX 1.) 
 
Following his divorce, Applicant was again stationed overseas from February 2001 
until May 2005. During a brief return to the United States, Applicant experienced 
difficulties maintaining his finances. He borrowed $5,000 in February 2006 from the 
creditor of SOR ¶ 1.d to help with his higher living expenses. However, he made monthly 
payments through an allotment of over $200 from February 2006 until February 2014 and 
has fully paid this account. Applicant’s 2017 and 2016 CBRs show a $0 balance. 
However, this creditor is listed in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy and any outstanding 
balance will be addressed through the bankruptcy rule. (GX 4; GX 3; AX E; Tr. 62-65.) 
 
Applicant was again stationed overseas from 2005 until he retired in 2011, and 
employed by a Federal contractor overseas from 2011 until 2014. Upon returning to the 
United States, Applicant anticipated and was prepared for the higher cost-of-living 
expenses he would encounter stateside. Despite this knowledge, Applicant began 
experiencing financial difficulties that ultimately resulted in the SOR debts, due to several 
unanticipated factors. First, Applicant was unemployed from April until June 2014 while 
his new employer was awaiting funding for the contract on which Applicant would be 
working. Second, when Applicant started his new job, he earned significantly less money 
than he had while working abroad. Third, Applicant and his current wife separated in 
September 2014. The separation resulted in Applicant’s having to support two 
households. Further, Applicant assisted his mother and siblings with their expenses. (GX 
1; GX 2; Tr. 29; Tr. 57.)  
 
The $19,818 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, is for a delinquent vehicle-loan deficiency 
balance. In 2007 while living abroad, Applicant purchased a vehicle for approximately 
$20,500 and consistently made timely payments. However, after returning to the United 
States in 2014 and encountering unforeseen financial strains, he was unable to maintain 
the payments, and the vehicle was voluntarily repossessed and sold at auction for an 
unknown amount. Applicant has not been contacted by the creditor since the 
repossession. However, the account is listed on Applicant’s February 2017 CBR as 
having been charged off in the amount of $19,818. Applicant disputes the amount of this 
debt because it does not reflect the payments he made on the vehicle or the sale price. 
This debt is included in the current Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (Tr. 57-61; AX E.)    
 
Upon permanently returning to the United States, Applicant did not properly 
calculate his Federal tax deductions for tax year 2014, and ended up owing approximately 
$3,000. He entered a repayment plan with the IRS in 2015, under which he paid 
approximately $120 per month for several months. However, due to other financial 
obligations and overall financial strain, including assisting his wife and daughter with their 
living expenses, Applicant was unable to maintain the payments. His Federal tax debt is 
now approximately $3,697. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Applicant most recently contacted the IRS in 
October 2017 to ascertain an accurate amount due. He also contacted several tax relief 
companies that he had seen advertised, but concluded that such companies were not 
4 
 
legitimate due to the high cost of up-front fees. (Tr. 51-54.) Additionally, as a result of 
incurring the 2014 unanticipated tax debt, Applicant has engaged the services of an Air 
Force legal office to prepare his taxes since 2015. He has timely filed and met his tax 
obligations since that time. (Tr. 55-56.) This debt is included in the current Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is for a credit card. Applicant made payments on 
the $8,258 balance through a monthly allotment of $232 beginning in June 2014. 
Applicant has paid $7,671, and the remaining balance is $3,231 as of April 2017. (Tr. 65-
67; Answer.) The balance of this debt is included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
 
Applicant paid the consumer credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f in May or June 
2014. The February 2017 and January 2016 CBRs show no balance due. Applicant 
disputed this debt and it has been removed from his CBR. This debt is resolved. (GX 4; 
GX 3; Tr. 72-74.)  
 
Applicant paid the foreign utility bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g before returning to the 
United States. Applicant credibly testified that in order to be permitted to out-process from 
the military installation where Applicant worked, he was required to clear all living-
expense related debts before he could receive his orders to be released from the 
installation. (Tr. 71.) This debt is resolved. 
 
The $952 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is for a fee levied by Applicant’s former 
landlord. Applicant resided in an apartment where the upstairs neighbors were noisy and 
disrespectful. Applicant complained multiple times, his complaints were not responded to, 
and Applicant ultimately moved out before the expiration of the lease. Applicant disputed 
this debt and it has been removed from his CBR. (GX 4; GX 2.) 
 
Applicant’s former supervisor and current coworker, who has known Applicant 
since he hired him for over four years ago, testified that Applicant is a dependable and 
trustworthy employee with the utmost integrity, and a dedicated father who is active in the 
community. (Tr. 21-25.) 
 
A former colleague of Applicant’s, who has known him for over 17 years, met 
Applicant while he was an non-commissioned officer serving as a courier abroad. 
Applicant’s former colleague states that Applicant was selected for this position due to his 
“trustworthiness and dependability to safeguard and deliver our nation’s secrets to their 
destination without fear of being compromised.” Applicant’s former supervisor while in this 
position, who has known Applicant for over 14 years, states that Applicant was always 
professional, trustworthy, and reliable. (AX B.) 
 
Applicant’s former supervisor of three years, who has known Applicant for over 
nine years, worked with Applicant to develop and implement an information technology 
system. She states that Applicant has an unrivaled work ethic, which includes disclosing 
his work-related mistakes in order to improve the quality of the work product. She states 
5 
 
that Applicant’s “integrity is above reproach, he is dependable, reliable, efficient, and 
highly effective.” (AX B.) 
 
Applicant’s former co-worker of two years, who has known Applicant for more than 
seven years, views him as a friend and mentor who displays loyalty, leadership and 
integrity. Another of Applicant’s former co-workers, who was known Applicant for more 
than three years, states that Applicant possesses a high degree of honesty and integrity, 
and highly recommends Applicant for security clearance. (AX B.) 
 
Applicant completed a financial counseling course in January 2018. He has not 
incurred any recent delinquent debt and lives within his means. (GX 4.) He took two 
personal loans in 2017 to organize his finances. He timely paid these accounts through 
allotment, and the creditors are listed in his Chapter 13 payment plan. (GX 4; Tr. 80-90.) 
He has approximately $3,000 in his 401(k) account. (Tr. 91.) He provides financial support 
to his wife and daughter, including for his daughter’s health insurance, and to his mother 
as needed. His brother and his brother’s fiancée reside with Applicant, but remain unable 
to contribute to the household expenses. (Tr. 35-36; Tr. 89.) Applicant is financially 
capable of meeting his monthly payment of $1,100 for his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy 
payment. (Tr. 101; AX C; AX E.) Applicant’s testimony was straightforward, sincere, and 
credible.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
6 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
7 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The record evidence establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline:  
 
           AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has experienced two distinct periods of financial difficulty. The first arose 
in 2001 when Applicant returned to the United States after having worked abroad, and 
8 
 
suffered a significant decrease in income, an overall cost-of-living increase, and 
difficulties in his marriage that led to divorce. Applicant discharged his marital debt 
through the legal course of Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) The conditions that led 
to these financial difficulties were largely beyond Applicant’s control and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 The second period of financial difficulty arose in 2014, when Applicant permanently 
returned to the United States after having worked abroad for many years. First, Applicant 
experienced several months of unemployment. Once gaining employment, he 
experienced a significant decrease in income. His financial strains were exacerbated by 
separating from his wife in September 2014. The separation resulted in Applicant’s 
becoming responsible for financing two households, as well as supplementing his wife’s 
and daughter’s expenses. Additionally, upon his return to the United States, Applicant’s 
mother and siblings required financial assistance from Applicant. As a result of the change 
in Applicant’s financial circumstances and obligations, he fell behind on paying his debts, 
which ultimately resulted in the voluntary repossession of his vehicle in 2014 (SOR 1.c), 
and the other SOR debts.    
 
 Due to a misunderstanding on Applicant’s part, he improperly calculated his 
Federal tax deductions, which resulted in an approximately $3,000 tax debt for 2014. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.) He initially set up an installment payment with the IRS, but was unable to 
maintain the payments. He maintained contact with the IRS, and proactively engaged 
professional tax preparers in 2015 to prevent future mistakes on his taxes. He has timely 
filed and paid his taxes since 2015. 
 
 Applicant initially sought financial assistance through a debt-consolidation 
company and a credit-restoration company, and successfully disputed SOR debts 1.f and 
1.h. However, Applicant determined that it was necessary to contact an attorney, and 
after completing credit counseling, filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in January 2018. His 
monthly payments of $1,100 are within his means. The remaining SOR debts, including 
the tax debt, are included in the bankruptcy. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 While Applicant’s finances are not perfect, he began addressing his delinquent 
accounts, as his finances would permit, beginning in 2014. Applicant completed financial 
counseling, and has instituted and executed a plan for repaying all his remaining 
delinquent accounts. His debts were not due to irresponsible spending, and he has not 
9 
 
incurred any recent delinquent debt. Applicant’s past financial difficulties do not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances.  I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
  
Applicant served on active duty in the Air Force for over 23 years. He has held a 
security clearance for over 29 years, and is a highly regarded and trusted employee, co-
worker, and friend. He was straightforward, sincere, and credible in his testimony.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the potential security concerns raised by his past financial issues. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
