 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01409  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 1, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2017, and requested a hearing before  
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 10, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 15, 2017, scheduling the hearing for September 13, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called two 
witnesses. Applicant presented two documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AppXs) A and B. The record was left open until November 30, 2017, for receipt of 
additional documentation. On November 30, 2017, AppX C was offered and admitted 
into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 22, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. (At his hearing, he admitted an 
amended SOR allegation ¶ 1.k., which amended the amount owed from $472.00 to 
$122.00.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since 2011. (GX 1 at page 11.) 
Applicant retired, after 20 years of active duty service with the U.S. Army, as a Staff 
Sergeant. (TR at page 43 line 22 to page 44 line 9, and GX 1 at pages 18~19.) His 
spouse of 26 years, who also handles their family finances, testified on behalf of 
Applicant. (TR at page 19 line 7 to page 35 line 12.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he owes a past-due debt to Creditor A, as the result of 
an automobile repossession, in the amount of about $10,339. (TR at page 19 line 7 to 
page 23 line 3.) Applicant’s spouse averred that they would address this admitted past-
due debt; but despite having more than two months to do so, he submitted no evidence 
that they have done anything to settle this debt. (TR at page 30 line 9 to page 31 line 8.) 
This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. and 1.c.  Applicant admits that he owed two past-due debts to Creditor B in 
an amount totaling about $2,116. (TR at page 31 lines 8~23.) Applicant’s spouse 
averred that they would address these admitted past-due debts, and he submitted 
documentation that they were settled for $567.32. (AppX C at page 3.) These 
allegations are found for Applicant. 
 
 1.d.  Applicant admits that he owes a past-due debt to Creditor D in the amount 
of about $463. (TR at page 31 line 24 to page 32 line 6.) Applicant’s spouse averred 
that they would address this admitted past-due debt; but despite having more than two 
months to do so, he submitted no evidence that they have done anything to settle this 
debt. This allegation is also found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admits that he owes a past-due debt to Creditor E in the amount of 
about $353. (TR at page 32 lines 8~20.) Applicant’s spouse averred that they would 
address this admitted past-due debt; but despite having more than two months to do so, 
he submitted no evidence that they have done anything to settle this debt. This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
3 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that he owes delinquent state income taxes in the amount of 
about $32,130. (TR at page 22 line 4 to page 26 line 6.)  Applicant’s spouse averred 
that they would address this admitted past-due tax debt, and he submitted 
documentation demonstrating that they have monies withheld from their paychecks to 
do so. (AppXs A and B.) This allegation is found for Applicant 
 
 1.g. Applicant admits that he owed a past-due debt to Creditor G in an amount 
totaling about $2,035. (TR at page 33 line 2~14.) Applicant’s spouse averred that they 
would address this admitted past-due debt, and he submitted documentation that it has 
been “PAID IN FULL.” (AppX C at page 2.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.h. and 1.j. Applicant admits that he owes two past-due medical debts to 
Creditor H in an amount totaling about $922. (TR at page 33 line 14 to page 34 line 14.) 
Applicant’s spouse averred that they would address these admitted past-due debts; but 
despite having more than two month to do so, he submitted no evidence that they have 
done anything to settle this debt. These allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.i. and 1.k. Applicant admits that he owed two past-due debts to Creditor I in an 
amount totaling about $594. (TR at page 34 line 14 to page 35 line 12.) Applicant’s 
spouse averred that they would address these admitted past-due debts, and he 
submitted documentation that they have been “satisfied.” (AppX C at page 1.) These 
allegations are found for Applicant. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a long history of 
delinquencies. Although he is addressing his delinquent state income taxes; and has 
paid some of his admitted past-due debts, other admitted past-due debts, totaling about 
$12,077, remain outstanding. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has not been established. 
 
  
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is well respected in the workplace, 
as testified to by his supervisor. (TR at page 37 line 19 to page 42 line 14.) However, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
