 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01111 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
August 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline K. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on October 23, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 16, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 17, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, which 
were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called three 
witnesses. Applicant presented five documents, which I marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AppXs) A through E, and admitted into evidence. The record was left open until March 
 
2 
 
16, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. On March 15, 2018, Applicant offered 
AppXs F~H, which were also admitted into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (TR) on January 25, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., and 1.c~1.e. He denied 
SOR allegations¶¶ 1.b. and 1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since May of 2016. (GX 1 at page 5, and TR at 
page 59 line 2 to page 63 line 5.) 
  
Guideline K – Handling Protected Information  
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that in November of 1983, more than 30 years ago, he 
failed to properly secure, inadvertently marked as Secret print-outs, in an approved 
container. (TR at page 66 line 3 to page 68 line 20, and GX 7 at page 1.) The printer in 
question designated everything printed on it as Secret. (Id.) Although the unclassified 
print-outs in question may have been improperly marked as Secret, they should have 
been given those protections required of a Secret document. As a result, Applicant was 
given a verbal warning. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denies that in February of 1984, again more than 30 years ago,  he 
transmitted classified information on an unclassified computer. He, in fact, admits that 
he transmitted Top Secret materials on a Secret computer; and as such, may have 
caused unauthorized “spillover” of classified information. (TR at page 68 line 21 to page 
77 line 16, and at page 116 line 16 to page 119 line 10.) As a result, Applicant was 
suspended for five days. 
 
 However, he denies that in February of 1984 he failed to properly secure 
classified materials in a room where a meeting was being held, as is required of the last 
person to depart the room. Applicant was not a participant in the meeting; and as such, 
was not the last person to depart the room, as the meeting continued after his 
departure. (Id., and GX 7 at pages 1~2.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that in December of 1988, nearly 30 years ago, he failed to 
secure classified containers, as he forgot to spin the locks on two safes. (TR at page 77 
line 17 to page 79 line 10, and GX 7 at pages 3~4.) As a result, he was given a verbal 
warning and counseling. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that in February of 1989, again nearly 30 years ago, he 
failed to secure classified “diskettes.” Although he locked the door to his room, he left 
the diskettes on his desk. (TR at page 80 line 15 to page 82 line 8, and GX 7 at pages 
2~3.) As a result, he was given a verbal counseling. 
 
 
3 
 
 1.e. (2) Applicant admits that in 1998 or 1999, about 20 years ago while on a 
boat-outing, he may have inadvertently discussed his classified work with his parents. 
(TR at page 92 line 2 to page 96 line 9, and at page 121 at 7 to page 122 at 15.) 
Applicant’s parents were, and still are, unaware of any classified information being 
discussed. (Id., and AppX 7.) Applicant’s father held a Top Secret security clearance 
from about 1967 to 2008. (AppX 7.) 
 
 1.e. (1)  Applicant admits that in 2003, about 15 years ago, he show classified 
materials on slides to prospective employers during job interviews. (TR at page 85 line 
10 to page 92 line 1, and at page 119 line 11 to page 121 line 6.) This was a clear 
security clearance violation. 
 
 1.f. (1) Applicant denies that in June of 2009, about nine years ago, he discussed 
classified information with a co-worker in a public place. It was, in fact, a secured 
conference room, where about 40 cleared people were attending a meeting. (TR at 
page 98 line 16 to page 103 line 3, and at page 122 line 16 to page 123 line 8.) 
Applicant sat well away from the door; and when un-cleared food servers entered the 
room, all classified conversations ceased. (Id.) This is corroborated by the testimony of 
two team leaders from Applicant’s former employer. (TR at page 21 line 10 to page 26 
line 5, and at page 44 lines 14~24.)  I find no security clearance violation here, and 
none was determined as such at the time of the incident. 
 
 1.f. (2) Applicant denies that in August of 2011, about seven years ago,  he 
knowingly gave his security code for a classified security container to his manager who 
did not have permission to have the security code. Applicant, his manager, who held a 
security clearance, and other cleared persons, attempted to enter a secured room. (TR 
at page 103 line 4 to page 107 line 18, and at page 123 line 9 to page 124 line 14.) After 
about “half an hour” of repeated, failed attempts to open the room’s door; Applicant’s 
manager asked for the combination, went to the front desk and returned with another 
cleared individual, who opened the secured door. (Id.)  This is also corroborated by the 
testimony of two team leaders from Applicant’s former employer. (TR at page 26 line 6 
to page 31 line 17, and at page 34 line 23 to page 36 line 15.) I find no security 
clearance violation here, and none was determined as such at the time of the incident 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
4 
 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks national security eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K - Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information is set 
out in AG ¶ 33:  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt 
about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security 
concern. 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 34. Five are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium; 
 
(c) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view protected information outside 
one's need to know; 
 
(e) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 About 20 to 30 plus years ago, Applicant had five admitted and/or possible 
security clearance violations. More recently, about 15 years ago, Applicant had a clear 
violation when he shared classified materials during job interviews.  
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no evidence of 
compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 
6 
 
 I find AG ¶ 35(a) and AG ¶ 35(b) clearly applicable here. Applicant’s last security 
violation was 15 years ago. So much time has elapsed since the behavior that it is 
unlikely to recur. Furthermore, three witnesses, consisting of two former team leaders 
and a current co-worker, testified as to Applicant’s trustworthiness. (TR at page 17 line 
4 to page 36 line 15, at page 37 line 19 to page 50 line 18, and at page 52 line 2 to 
page 57 line 23.) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by those with whom and for whom, he worked. (TR at page 17 line 4 to page 
57 line 23, and AppXs G and H.) He performs well at his job. (AppXs B, C and F.)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Handling of Protected Information security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraphs 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.-1.f.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
