 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00703 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kian R. Magana, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
August 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 10, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was originally assigned to another 
Administrative Judge in June of 2017, but later reassigned to me on December 4, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) had previously issued a notice of 
hearing on October 6, 2017, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2017. The hearing 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant 
presented 12 documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through L, and 
admitted into evidence. The record was left open until January 5, 2018, for receipt of 
additional documentation. The Government offered GX 6, and the Applicant offered 
AppXs M through Q, all of which were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (TR) on December 12, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR, except for ¶¶ 1.l., and 1.n., averring 
credibly that they were duplicates of ¶¶ 1.k., and 1.a., respectively. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed by the defense contractor since May of 2016. (GX 1 at page 
10.) He is married, and has one child. Applicant was previously married, had one child; 
and had an additional child out of wedlock. (TR at page 57 line 8 to page 62 line 13.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes the vast majority of his financial difficulties to the care of his 
first legitimate child, and to the unknown medical bills incurred by Applicant’s former 
girlfriend, the mother of his illegitimate second child. (Id., and TR at page 37 line 10 to 
page 38 line 17.) Through the auspices of a Consumer Counseling Service (CCS), 
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address his admitted past-due indebtedness, 
except for the “child support” allegations of ¶¶ 1.a., and 1.n., which shall be addressed 
separately.  
 
 1.a. and 1.n. Applicant’s mother took care of his first legitimate child. She did so 
with aid from the state in which she lived, which is separate from Applicant’s state of 
residence. (TR at page 37 line 10 to page 38 line 17, at page 50 line 10 to page 51 line 
6, at page 52 line 13 to page 54 line 10, and at page 62 line 14 to page 67 line 23.) It is 
alleged that Applicant owes $14,772 in back child support to his mother’s state of 
residence. Applicant has been making payments of $200 every two weeks towards this 
admitted debt; and as such, the balance due has been reduced to $4,880, as evidenced 
by documentation from that state. (AppXs A, K, and L.) I find that Applicant is making a 
good-faith effort to address his back child support. 
 
 1.b.~1.f., 1.h.~1.l., and 1.p~1.z. For the most part, unbeknownst to Applicant, his 
former unmarried partner incurred about $12,361 in unpaid medical bills in Applicant’s 
name. (TR at page 30 line 13 to page 31 line 21.) Through the auspices of his CCS, 
Applicant is making monthly payments of $200 towards these medical debts, as 
evidenced by documentation from the CCS. (TR at page 34 line 14 to page 35 line 18, 
at page 36 lines 12~18, at page 39 line 4~24, at page 48 line 17 to page 49 line 24, at 
page 50 line 10 to page 51 line 6, at page 87 line 3 to page 89 line 24; and AppXs A, K, 
 
3 
 
L, I, J, O and P.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address the 
medical bills of the mother of his second child. 
 
 1.g. Applicant admits that he owes Creditor G about $465 for a past-due debt. 
This debt is also being addressed through Applicant’s CCS. (TR at page 35 to page 36 
line 11, and at page 81 line 24 to page 82 line 16.) 
 
 1.m. Applicant admits that he was indebted to his former state of residence as 
the result of a traffic ticket for about $808. He was unaware of this ticket when he 
moved to the present state of his residence. (TR at page 31 line 22 to page 32 line 21.) 
Once he was made aware of this delinquency, he “paid in full” the traffic ticket, as 
evidenced by documentation from his prior state of residence. (AppX E.) 
 
 1.o. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor O for a past-due water bill 
in the amount of about $55. He paid this bill soon after the receipt of the SOR, as 
evidenced by documentation from this creditor. (TR at page 46 lines 9~21, and AppX F.) 
 
 1.aa. Applicant was unaware of a past-due debt to Creditor AA in the amount of 
about $318; but it is being investigated by his CCS, and if it is his, it will be addressed. 
(TR at page 55 line 10 to page 56 line 23, and at page 82 line 17 to page 83 line 10.) I 
find this to be a good-faith effort to address this alleged past-due debt. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due medical bills, and admitted back child support. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are being addressed through monthly, back child 
support payments that have reduced this this debt from about $14,000 to $4,000. His 
other debts are being handled through the auspices of his CCS. He has thus 
demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has 
been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered that Applicant is well 
respected in the workplace. (AppXs M and N.)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.aa.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
