KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: In his appeal brief, Applicant contends that his bankruptcies should not be used against
him because he is entitled to the legal protections of bankruptcy.  He also argues that 11 U.S.C. §
525, Protection against discriminatory treatment, precludes his discharged debts from being
used against him.  We note that Guideline F has no disqualifying condition that raises a security
concern merely because an applicant has filed bankruptcy.  In discussing § 525 in the past, we
have stated that, while an applicant has a legal right to declare bankruptcy, the Government is
not precluded from considering the negative security implications of his or her history of
recurring financial problems. In this case, the Judge noted that she was not basing her decision
on “the bankruptcies themselves” but on Applicant’s history of financial indebtedness
surrounding those bankruptcies.  Applicant has not established that the Judge erred in
considering his financial history, including his bankruptcies. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00684.a1
DATE: 08/07/2018
DATE: August 7, 2018     
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 17-00684
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On May 3, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On March 29, 2018, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Gina L. Marine denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant, who is 54 years old, has never been married and has no children.  He honorably
served in the military for about 9 years.  In 2013, he retired after 20 years of Federal employment. 
He was unemployed from early 2013 to late 2014 and, for about 15 of those months, was a full-time
student and earned a bachelor’s degree.  In late 2014, he began an internship, but was not hired as
a full-time employee.  He was then unemployed for about six months.  He appears to have been fully
employed since late 2015. 
The SOR, as amended, alleges that Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in
1996, received a Chapter 13 bankruptcy discharge in 2003, had a Chapter 13 bankruptcy dismissed
in 2009 for failure to make payments, and received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2017.1  The
amended SOR also alleged that Applicant owed about $9,900 to the IRS for 2004-2006; owed about
$3,400 to the IRS for 2009; owed about $3,815 to a local government for 2013; had a past-due
mortgage account for about $128,000 in foreclosure with a balance of about $215,000, and had five
collection accounts totaling about $4,700.  He admitted some of the SOR allegations and denied
others.  The denied allegations were established by record evidence.  He attributed his financial
problems to medical problems he began experiencing in 2009 and to inconsistent employment.  The
record is silent about the impact that Applicant’s past circumstances had on his ability to pay his
debts and on his income and expenses.  
The Judge’s Analysis
“Because bankruptcy is an acceptable form of debt resolution, the concern is not with the
bankruptcies themselves, but with underlying history of financial indebtedness surrounding them. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to fully establish any of the potentially applicable
mitigating factors.”  Decision at 6.  Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion.  
Discussion
1 The SOR was amended in Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM.
2
In his appeal brief, Applicant contends that his bankruptcies should not be used against him
because he is entitled to the legal protections of bankruptcy.  He also argues that 11 U.S.C. § 525,
Protection against discriminatory treatment, precludes his discharged debts from being used against
him.2  We note that Guideline F has no disqualifying condition that raises a security concern  merely
because an applicant has filed bankruptcy.  In discussing § 525 in the past, we have stated that, while
an applicant has a legal right to declare bankruptcy, the Government is not precluded from
considering the negative security implications of his or her history of recurring financial problems. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-00359 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2003).   In this case, the Judge noted that
she was not basing her decision on “the bankruptcies themselves” but on Applicant’s history of
financial indebtedness surrounding those bankruptcies.  Applicant has not established that the Judge
erred in considering his financial history, including his bankruptcies. 
Applicant further argues that all of the alleged debts, except for the tax debt to the local
government, have been discharged in his latest bankruptcy and should not have been listed in the
SOR.  It is well established that, even if debts are resolved through payment, bankruptcy, or by other
means, a Judge may still consider the circumstances underlying the debts for what they may reveal
about the applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 15-06160 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jul. 18, 2017). 
In his arguments, Applicant highlights his periods of unemployment,  his medical problems,
and his military and Federal civilian service.  We note that the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 16-01251 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun.
7, 2017).   
 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances: such a determination “. . . may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the  interests of the national security.’”   See, e.g., ADP Case No. 16-01251, supra, at 2.  See also
Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
2  11 U.S.C. § 525 provides, in part, that “a governmental unit may not deny, revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew
a license, permit, charter, franchise, or other similar grant to, condition such a grant to, discriminate with respect to such
a grant against, deny employment to, terminate the employment of, or discriminate with respect to employment against,
a person that is or has been a debtor under this title or a bankrupt or a debtor under the Bankruptcy Act, or another person
with whom such bankrupt or debtor has been associated, solely because such bankrupt or debtor is or has been a debtor
under this title or a bankrupt or debtor under the Bankruptcy Act, has been insolvent before the commencement of the
case under this title, or during the case but before the debtor is granted or denied a discharge, or has not paid a debt that
is dischargeable in the case under this title or that was discharged under the Bankruptcy Act.”  [Emphasis added.]
3
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale             
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
