 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01825 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 11, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 14, 2018, 
and reassigned to me on April 16, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 19, 2018, scheduling the hearing for April 
16, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not 
submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 26, 2018.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. He will 
start work if he receives a security clearance. He served on active duty in the U.S. 
military from 1978 until he was honorably discharged in 1988. He served in the 
reserve53545354 from 1988 to 1990 and 2000 to 2003. He has a bachelor’s degree, 
which was awarded in 2008, and a master’s degree, which was awarded in 2015. His 
third marriage ended in divorce in 2016. He has two children, ages 20 and 12.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which are attributed primarily to his 
divorces and periods of unemployment and underemployment. He filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case in 1996. His dischargeable debts were apparently discharged in 1998. 
He did not file federal income tax returns when they were due for tax years 2010 
through 2015. He estimated that he owed the IRS about $75,000 for those tax years.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts. However, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.e are duplicate accounts. The SOR also alleges the Chapter 13 bankruptcy and 
Applicant’s failure to file his federal tax returns and pay his taxes. 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.i. He denied 
owing the remaining debts. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.n are not listed 
on the most recent credit report. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e are listed 
on the most recent credit report. However, the $30 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d 
does not list a creditor.3 
 
 Applicant retained a law firm to assist him in repairing his credit and deleting 
inaccurate items from his credit report. He testified that he retained a tax professional to 
file his back tax returns and negotiate a payment plan with the IRS. He asserted that the 
back returns were filed in 2016, but he did not receive the tax documents from the tax 
professional until the week before the hearing. He stated that he owed the IRS about 
$5,000. Applicant was informed of the importance of documentary evidence in a 
financial case. He presented no documentary evidence at his hearing or post-hearing.4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16-24, 38; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 38, 45-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-34, 37, 47-59; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts, unfiled 
tax returns, and unpaid federal income taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e are duplicate accounts. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005). SOR ¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant. 
 
A Chapter 13 bankruptcy from more than 20 years ago that was apparently 
completed with a discharge does not raise any current security concerns. SOR ¶ 1.o is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s divorces, unemployment, and underemployment constitute conditions 
that were largely beyond his control. His failure to file his tax returns and pay his taxes 
were not beyond his control. Failure to comply with tax laws suggests that an applicant 
has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01726 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2018). A 
person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax returns 
and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 17-01382 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2018).  
 
 Applicant stated, without corroborating documentation, that the tax returns have 
been filed and his federal tax debt has been reduced to about $5,000. The Appeal 
Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2006)). There is no documentary evidence that he has filed his tax returns or paid any 
of his delinquent debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant denied owing many of the debts alleged in the SOR. The debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.n are not listed on the most recent credit report. Those debts 
are mitigated. The remaining disputed debts are listed on the most recent credit report. 
However, the $30 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c does not list a creditor. That debt 
is also mitigated. The remaining debts are not mitigated. 
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Security concerns raised by Applicant’s finances are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.o:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
