 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03248 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey DeAngelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Benson, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
            Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2016, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 25, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
                                                          
1 The SOR skipped allegation 1.g. altogether. There are 20 SOR allegations cited from 1.a through 1.u. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 On November 18, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He submitted documents labeled as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A through U. On January 24, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On April 
12, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
Hearing, setting the hearing for May 8, 2018.  
 
 During the video-teleconference (VTC) hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any additional documents into evidence 
during the hearing. AE A through U were entered into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 22, 2018. I held the record open for 
one month in the event Applicant wanted to submit additional documents after the 
hearing. He did not submit any additional documents, and the record closed on June 8, 
2018.  
 
     Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel made a request during the hearing that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to Taiwan. Applicant had no objection to this request and 
the documents were admitted into evidence as GE 3.  
 
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). See the Taiwan section of the Findings of Fact of this 
decision, infra, for the administratively noticed facts concerning Taiwan. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), of 
the SOR. The security concerns alleged Applicant’s familial connections to Taiwan, 
financial support to foreign nationals, and Applicant’s travel and attendance at 
international conferences in Taiwan.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and works for a defense contractor as a senior research 
scientist since 1998. He emigrated from Taiwan to the United States in 1992 when he 
was 25 years old. He attended a university from 1992 until December 1996 and earned 
his doctorate degree. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. He has possession 
of a valid U.S. passport since 2004, and only uses this passport for travel. (GE 1; Tr. 27) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was born in Taiwan. She is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
They were married in Michigan in 1993. His two daughters, ages 22 and 19, were born 
and currently reside in the United States. (GE 1; Tr. 34-35) 
 
 Applicant’s father, brother, mother-in-law, two sisters-in-law and two brothers-in-
law all live in Taiwan and are citizens of that country. Applicant’s brother is a carpenter 
for a small company. His father, 80 years old, has been retired for 20 years. None of 
these family members are associated with a foreign government or foreign military. 
Applicant has weekly contact with his father and brother, and monthly contact with his 
mother-in-law. Applicant also has casual contact with friends in Taiwan. His friends are 
not associated with the military or government of Taiwan, except for two friends who are 
professors at a public university, which is supported by the government of Taiwan. 
Applicant has never been asked by friends or family members about the nature of his 
work duties or his scientific research. All of these family members and associates were 
reported on Applicant’s e-QIP. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 36-37) 
 
 In 2014, Applicant’s mother was involved in a serious motorcycle accident and 
suffered brain trauma. She lost her ability to talk, eat, and she was unable to care for 
herself, which required in-home healthcare assistance and rehabilitation expenses. 
Applicant provided money to assist with his mother’s medical expenses. She passed 
away in 2017. Applicant no longer provides financial assistance, as his father receives 
sufficient retirement and savings income for his needs. Applicant has travelled to 
Taiwan on multiple occasions to visit his ailing parents and family. He stayed at his 
parents’ house. Applicant fully disclosed his financial assistance to his parents and his 
travel to Taiwan on the e-QIP. (GE 1; Tr. 15-16)   
 
 In October 2011, Applicant attended an international conference in Taiwan. The 
conference was funded through a contract approved by his program manager. The 
second international conference attended by Applicant also occurred in Taiwan in 
August 2015. Both conferences involved fundamental research in liquid atomization and 
spray systems, nothing classified in nature. Applicant received approval from the U.S. 
Air Force to attend the conferences. Any of his papers or speeches at the international 
conferences were reviewed by his security officials and were cleared for public release, 
per security requirements. Applicant is vigilant about following all security requirements, 
to include before, during, and after his trips. Applicant disclosed his international 
conferences on his e-QIP, and provided numerous documents with his SOR response 
to demonstrate his compliance with security requirements in order to attend the 
conferences. (GE 1, GE 2; AE D, AE E, AE F, AE G, AE H; Tr. 16-17, 32-34) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A 2008 letter of appreciation from a high-ranking official in the research 
laboratory revealed that he had worked with Applicant in a professional capacity on a 
collaboration project. He indicated that Applicant is a serious, hard-working individual, a 
leader, and a valuable team member. Another co-worker praised Applicant in a 2017 e-
mail for his fundamental work on a project. Applicant also provided copies of his 2008 
 
4 
 
 
Certificate of Merit from the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and his 
2002 award from the Institute of Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems. (AE Q, AE R, 
AE S, AE T)   
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the China policy; however, it maintains strong and, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan in order to further peace and stability in Asia. The United 
States supports Taiwan’s membership in appropriate international organizations where 
statehood is not a requirement for membership and encourages its meaningful 
participation in appropriate international organizations, such as the World Trade 
Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian 
Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) has been recognized to be in the long-term interest of the United States.  
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resorting to coercive measures against its citizens 
to collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
The PRC is Taiwan’s largest trading partner and the United States is Taiwan’s 
second largest trading partner. The PRC and Taiwan are collectors of U.S. economic 
and proprietary information. In the past ten years, these activities on behalf of Taiwan 
have resulted in criminal and civil charges in the United States. The PRC seeks to 
acquire intelligence through multiple sources, including through illegal means.  
 
 The United States and Taiwan have had a close military and diplomatic 
relationship for more than 60 years. Taiwan’s armed forces are equipped with weapons 
obtained primarily from the United States. In January 2010, the Barack Obama 
administration notified Congress of its intent to sell Taiwan $6.4 billion worth of various 
defensive weapons, including Blackhawk helicopters and Patriot missiles, and 
authorized an additional $5.8 billion in September 2011, which included a retrofit of 
Taiwan’s F-16 A/B fleet. Taiwan adheres to the principles of the nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty and has stated that it does not intend to produce nuclear weapons. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 7 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
6 
 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. A disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “contact .  .  . with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). In addition, AG ¶ 7(b) provides that 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individuals’ obligation to protect classified or sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group or 
country by providing that information or technology.”  
 
 Applicant has contact with his father, brother, and mother-in-law on a regular 
basis, and contact with his other relatives is less frequent. He visits his family members 
in Taiwan at least once every year. His family’s presence in a country that engages in 
espionage against the United States raises a significant security concern and generates 
a heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion of the Applicant. Those 
circumstances could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between his 
family members residing in Taiwan and the United States. There is also potential 
conflict between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and 
his possible desire to assist his foreign relatives by providing that information. The 
Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 lists two potential conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since immigrating in 1992. He became a 
U.S. citizen in 2004. He owns a home in the United States. His contact with his father, 
brother, and mother-in-law is ongoing, and his contact with other associates and 
relatives in Taiwan is less frequent, but those contacts do not overcome his loyalty to 
the United States. Applicant’s family members and associates are not directly involved 
in military or governmental work in Taiwan. They have positions in Taiwan that make it 
unlikely that he would be placed in the position of having to choose between his 
relatives’ interests and those of the United States. Applicant’s connections to the United 
States after 26 years are stronger than his familial ties to Taiwan. Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States based on his 
stellar 20-year work history. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):   
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s foreign contacts resulted 
from his birth in Taiwan. His children were born here, his immediate family resides here, 
and he voluntarily became a U.S. citizen in 2004. There is no evidence that he has ever 
taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. All of the foreign 
connections alleged in the SOR were self-reported by Applicant. There is no derogatory 
information about him in the record. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-u:   For Applicant 
   
                             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
