 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02047 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 17, 2015. On 
December 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 1, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 5, 
 
2 
 
2018, and the case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018. On April 24, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any 
documentary evidence. I held the record open until June 15, 2018, to enable her to 
submit documentary evidence. She timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 7, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old machinist employed by a defense contractor since 
October 2000. She served in the U.S. Navy Reserve (USNR) from January 2003 to 
February 2005 and received a general discharge under honorable conditions for non-
participation in USNR during her pregnancy and the birth of her first child. She received 
a security clearance in October 2003. 
 
 Applicant has never married, but she lived with a cohabitant from May 2013 until 
recently. She has two children, ages thirteen and four, who live with her. She did not 
receive child support from the father of her older child for eight years. She now receives 
$264 every two weeks. (Tr. 18, 46.) Her former cohabitant is the father of her younger 
child. He is unemployed and she has not sought child support from him 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in June 2000 and received a 
discharge in October 2000. (GX 3.) She filed another Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in 
December 2010 and received a discharge in March 2011. The 2010 bankruptcy petition 
listed assets of $13,431 and liabilities of $42,969. The unsecured debts included 
multiple medical bills, delinquent credit cards, and several payday loans, unpaid state 
taxes, and delinquent student loans. (GX 4; GX 5.) Her bankruptcies are alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.m and 1.n. 
 
Applicant completed a nine-month course at a business school and received a 
diploma in August 2000. She attended college courses from February to April 2007 and 
from February to July 2015. She has certificates as a massage therapist and a medical 
assistant. (GX 2 at 2; Tr. 24.) She incurred the four delinquent loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.d for $7,102; $5,145; $2,784; and $2,307. These delinquent loans are reflected in 
a credit report from March 2017 (GX 9.) Applicant testified that her pay is being 
garnished for a “dollar and something” every week, and five dollars from her checking 
account to repay the student loans. (Tr. 28.) She applied for an income-driven 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
repayment plan for these loans on May 23, 2018, the day before the hearing. (AX A.) 
She provided no further information by the date the record closed. The delinquent 
student loans are not resolved. 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent medical bills for $709 (SOR ¶ 1.e); $483 (SOR ¶ 
1.h); $189 (SOR ¶ 1.j); $152 (SOR ¶ 1.k); $50 (SOR ¶ 1.l); and $476 (SOR ¶ 1.p). 
These debts are reflected in the credit report from March 2017 (GX 9), except for the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, which is reflected in the credit report from October 2015 (GX 
8). Applicant testified that she suffers from fibromyalgia and a bulging disc in her spine, 
and she surmised that the medical debts are copayments. She has not taken any action 
to resolve them. (Tr. 33.) She did not provide any medical evidence of her illness, but 
she was visibly uncomfortable during the hearing. She testified that her ailments have 
caused her to miss work for medical appointments and periods of extreme discomfort 
and have limited the number of hours she works. Because of her work limitations, she 
no longer has an opportunity to work overtime. (Tr. 20.) 
 
 Applicant testified that her reduced income caused her to be evicted from her 
home in December 2016, and she was homeless for four months. During this time, she 
stayed at motels or lived with friends. She and her cohabitant made a payment 
agreement to pay the past-due rent at a rate of $100 per week and made the first 
payment in March 2017. (AX B.) The past-due rent is not reflected in the credit reports 
submitted by Department Counsel, is not alleged in the SOR, and appears to have been 
resolved. She and her cohabitant rented an apartment in March 2017, where she now 
resides. Her cohabitant lost his job and no longer lives with her, leaving her solely 
responsible for the rent, which is $829 per month. (Tr. 20, 26; GX 2 at 2; AX A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges three collection accounts on behalf of various banks for $656 
(SOR ¶ 1.f); $583 (SOR ¶ 1.g); and $393 (SOR ¶ 1.i). The accounts are reflected in a 
credit report from March 2017 (GX 9.) Applicant has not contacted the banks or the 
collection agencies or taken any action to resolve them. (Tr. 33-34.)  
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent state tax debt for $1,483 (SOR ¶ 1.q). In July 
2015, Applicant’s pay was garnished for $603 in unpaid state taxes. (GX 6.) After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted evidence that $1,000 of a federal income tax refund was 
applied to her state tax debt in April 2018, leaving a balance of $483. (AX F; AX G.) She 
submitted no evidence of efforts to resolve the remaining balance. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested and charged with petit larceny in 
February 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.r). Department Counsel submitted no police or court records 
reflecting this incident. Applicant was questioned about this incident during a personal 
subject interview (PSI) in January 2017. According to Applicant, she went to a craft 
store at about 8:00 am, before the store opened, and there were bins of merchandise 
outside the store. When no one came to the door to admit her, she left and returned 
around noon and purchased some craft items. About two days later she was arrested. 
The police told her that a store employee accused her of stealing an item from the 
outside bins. At her trial, she was represented by an attorney and pleaded not guilty, but 
 
4 
 
she was convicted. She appealed and the district attorney reduced the charge to 
trespassing, to which Applicant pleaded guilty pursuant to a plea bargain. She was fined 
$5 and sentenced to 75 hours of community service. (GX 2 at 4.) At the hearing, she 
denied stealing anything and testified that she does not know what she was accused of 
stealing. (Tr. 41.)  
 
 Applicant earns $54,882 per year, or about $4,570 per week. She has about 
$20,000 in her 401(k) retirement account. She has no savings. Her monthly expenses 
include her rent ($829), car payments and insurance ($515), child care ($175 per week), 
electric bill ($150-$200 per month), groceries ($200 per week), and cellphone ($200 per 
month). She did not have cable or a land-line telephone. Her testimony accounts for 
monthly expenses of about $2,119. She testified that she has no money left at the end 
of the month, but the record does not reflect how her remaining income is spent. She 
does not have a budget. (Tr. 30, 42-46.) She did not present any evidence of financial 
counseling beyond what was required by the bankruptcy court. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
5 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish the 
delinquent debts and the bankruptcies alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.q. Applicant admitted 
being arrested for petit larceny as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r, but she denied committing the 
offense at her first trial, in the PSI, and at the hearing. She admitted pleading guilty to 
trespassing under a plea agreement. I conclude that there is insufficient evidence to 
establish any personal conduct of security significance arising from the incident alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.r. However, the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.q is sufficient to raise the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, frequent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s medical problems and the financial 
irresponsibility of the fathers of her two children are circumstances largely beyond her 
control. However, she has not acted responsibly. She made contact with the lenders for 
her student loans, but she did not take any significant action to resolve the student 
loans until the day before the hearing. She admitted at the hearing that she had not 
contacted any of the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.l and 1.o-1.q. She has taken no 
significant affirmative action to resolve her state tax debt. Even though part of her 
federal tax refund was applied to her state tax debt, she still owes a substantial sum to 
the state. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling beyond that required by the bankruptcy court, and her financial problems are 
not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. The garnishments of Applicant’s pay to collect the 
delinquent student loans and the diversion of her federal income tax refund to pay her 
state tax debt do not constitute good-faith efforts to resolve the debts. See ISCR Case 
No. 09-05700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. Applicant has not established a payment plan for 
her delinquent state taxes. Even after the involuntary diversion of her federal income tax 
refund, the state tax debt is not resolved. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 I have incorporated 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
 
8 
 
my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis and applied the 
adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her 
financial history. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.r:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
