KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends the Judge erred by relying on Appeal Board decisions decided
under the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that do not include mitigating condition
20(g). Applicant’s argument is based on an incorrect premise (i.e., the Appeal Board decision in
question applied the previous guidelines) and lacks merit. To the extent Applicant is arguing that
the timing of resolution of tax filing deficiencies is not an important factor to consider under
mitigating condition 20(g), we find that argument unpersuasive and note it runs counter to
Appeal Board precedent. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00294.a1
DATE: 08/08/2018
DATE: August 8, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00294
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 6, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On May 31, 2017, Department
Counsel amended the SOR by adding a Guideline E allegation.  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
April 12, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Jennifer Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue  on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable finding on the Guideline E allegation
is not an issue on appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis  
Applicant failed to file, as required, his Federal income tax returns for 2010-2014 and his
state income tax returns for 2011 and 2012.  All of those tax returns have been filed.  Some were
filed about a month late, while others were filed years late.  He attributed his tax filing delinquencies
to stress arising from health issues of his parents and brother and from the death of his grandmother. 
In his background interviews, he stated that he forgot to complete his taxes due to demands at work
and also admitted to being lazy.  He timely filed his Federal and state tax returns for 2015 and 2016. 
Between about 2011 and 2013, he incurred approximately $94,000 in gambling losses.  He has not
gambled at the casino where he incurred the large losses since 2014 and last gambled on a trip with
friends in July 2016.  He signed statements promising to file his tax returns on time and to never
gamble again.  
 
“Applicant documented that he participated in financial counseling, and provided
documentation to show he filed 2015 and 2016 Federal and state income tax returns in a timely
manner.  However, he has not fully established that his problem is being resolved or is under control
because insufficient time has passed to demonstrate a track record of timely filing tax returns, as
required by law.  He only chose to file his 2011 and 2012 returns after receiving the SOR on March
2017.”  Decision at 6.
Discussion
Applicant contends the Judge erred by relying on Appeal Board decisions decided under the
previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that do not include mitigating condition 20(g).1  In
making his argument, he does not reference any specific cases cited in the Decision, but just refers
in a footnote to pages 6-7 of the Decision.  On those pages, the Judge only cites one Appeal Board
decision, i.e., ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017) for the proposition that timing
1 Directive, Encl., App. A. ¶ 20(g) states, “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”  Mitigating condition 20(g) first
appeared in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Guidelines, that became effective on June 8, 2017. 
2
of the resolution of financial problems is an important factor to consider in evaluating an applicant’s
case in mitigation.2  This cited case was decided under the latest revision of the adjudicative
guidelines and discusses the application of mitigating condition 20(g).  Applicant’s argument is
based on an incorrect premise (i.e., the Appeal Board decision in question applied the previous
guidelines) and lacks merit.  
As a related issue, Applicant appears to argue that the timing of the resolution of tax filing
deficiencies is not an important consideration under mitigating condition 20(g).  He notes that
mitigating condition 20(g) “has no reference to when or how long an [applicant] needs to establish
an arrangement with the appropriate tax authority and referenced sufficient time when the tax returns
were filed” (Appeal Brief at 5-6), and he also uses phrases such as “regardless of the method or time
frame” and “regardless of when compliance actually occurred” in making arguments about his
corrective action or mitigative evidence (Appeal Brief at 10 and 11).  To the extent Applicant is
arguing that the timing of resolution of tax filing deficiencies is not an important factor to consider
under mitigating condition 20(g), we find that argument unpersuasive and note it runs counter to
Appeal Board precedent.   Id.  See also, ISCR Case No. 17-01807 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2018). 
 
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not consider all of the record evidence and mis-
weighed the evidence.  For example, he claims that the Judge failed to consider the circumstances
surrounding his tax filing delinquencies, that he filed the delinquent tax returns, and that he filed his
2015 and 2016 tax returns on time.  The Judge, however, made findings about those matters.  His
arguments are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record nor enough to show the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7,
2017).  We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited in his brief,
which predates the 2017 revision of the adjudication guideline, but it is neither binding precedent
on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax
returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and
reliability required of those granted access to classified information.  ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at
3.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”
2 In the Decision, the Judge cited only one other Appeal Board decision, i.e., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3
(App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) for the proposition that failure to comply with Federal tax laws suggests an applicant has a
problem with abiding by well-established governmental rules and regulations and that voluntary compliance with rules
and regulation is essential for protecting classified information.  The Appeal Board has cited this precedent in cases,
including ISCR Case No. 15-06440, decided under the recently revised adjudicative guidelines.  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
