 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-00323 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Security concerns under Guidelines K (handling protected information) and E 
(personal conduct) are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On January 30, 2013, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1). On September 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in 
Appendix A new adjudicative guidelines (AGs), effective June 8, 2017.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines K and E. 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
 
2                                         
 
On October 11, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR (HE 3) 
Department Counsel requested a hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 13) On March 9, 2018, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 26, 2018, the case was assigned to 
me. On May 24, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 12, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 21-24; GE 1-4; AE A-B) On June 21, 2018, DOHA received a copy of the 
hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted in part the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. (HE 3) 
He also provided mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old senior engineer. (Tr. 5, 77; GE 1) In 2001, he graduated 
from high school. (Tr. 6; GE 1) In 2006, he received a bachelor of science degree in 
information technology management. (Tr. 6) In February 2010, he married. (Tr. 7) He 
adopted his spouse’s child, who was born in 2006. (GE 1) He served in the Army from 
2001 to 2008. (Tr. 7) He was deployed to Kuwait in 2003, and Iraq in 2004 and 2006. (Tr. 
7-8) His military occupational specialty involved the collection of military intelligence. (Tr. 
8) He left active duty as a sergeant (E-5). (Tr. 8) After he left active duty, he deployed to 
Iraq for about one year working for two different government contractors. (Tr. 30-32)  
 
Collection of Information about Weapons, Explosives, and Body Armor 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.b(i) through 2.b(vi) allege Applicant conducted Internet research and 
downloaded videos, pictures, and information on pornography, weapons, body armor, 
explosives, silencers, conversion of weapons to automatic, and other weapons’ 
modifications. Applicant was going to Iraq, and he said he wanted information that might 
enhance his safety in a combat zone. (Tr. 26, 49; SOR response) Applicant was on a 
counter-improvised explosive device (IED) team in Iraq. (Tr. 48) He was not authorized 
to have a weapon in Iraq as a government contractor. (Tr. 50-51) Applicant contended 
his research was constitutionally-protected conduct. (Tr. 26-27, 51-55) Applicant objected 
to investigative questions about his religion. (Tr. 27)2     
 
  
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 In accordance with “well established DoD policy [Applicant and his family’s] religious affiliation 
play[ed] no part” in this decision. ISCR Case No. 08-06795 at 6 n. 3 (App. Bd. May 25, 2012). 
 
3                                         
 
Removal of Classified Information from a Sensitive Compartmented Information 
Facility (SCIF) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges under the handling protected information guideline that in 
February 2010, Applicant removed a hard drive from a SCIF, downloaded material on his 
computer from the hard drive, and then returned the hard drive to the SCIF without 
authorization. SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges this conduct under the personal conduct guideline. 
Applicant used personal hard drives for his contractor duties because it had more storage 
capacity than the government hard drives. (Tr. 39-40) He also received hard drives from 
the government containing unclassified information at his home. (Tr. 67) After the security 
officer at the SCIF scanned his hard drive to ensure there was no virus on it, he was 
permitted to use it at work. (Tr. 40) He suggested that someone used his hard drive to 
transfer work data. (Tr. 41) He said he had “unclassified” stickers on his hard drives. (Tr. 
41) His team knew which hard drives were Applicant’s personal hard drives. (Tr. 42)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a allege that in March 2010, a forensic analysis of three 
unclassified hard drives and two portable unclassified external drives from Applicant’s 
workstation discovered over one million classified documents. A 2010 counter-
intelligence investigation indicated a forensic analysis of the media listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 2.a revealed four Top Secret documents created in 2007, and “over a million 
classified documents” at the Secret level. (GE 3 at 2)  
 
Applicant loaned a hard drive to another employee; that employee discovered a 
document classified as Secret on it; and he reported this discovery to security. (Tr. 42-44; 
SOR response) Applicant’s employer told him to bring in his home computer and hard 
drives, and Applicant complied with that direction. (Tr. 43) He said the investigation was 
closed because there was no evidence that he copied the classified document. (Tr. 44) 
 
Applicant provided a scenario to explain the classified documents on his hard 
drives and external drives at his residence. He said one of his hard drives had a “Secret” 
sticker on it. (Tr. 68) The drive was in his office or cubicle area, which had open storage. 
(Tr. 68-69) Someone may have taken one of his unclassified drives and mixed it in with 
their property, and then placed the classified information on the drive without putting a 
classified sticker on it. (Tr. 69) They must have returned the drive with classified 
information to him, and then Applicant must have taken it home. (Tr. 70) As to the 
classified information in his possession, he said, “I had no idea of how it got there or why 
it was there.” (Tr. 70)   
 
 Applicant suggested that the government reuses hard drives; one of the hard 
drives the government provided had the classified documents on it at one point; they were 
not properly deleted; and the government recovered them from Applicant’s media. (Tr. 
81-82) The classified documents on his media could also have resulted from a dump of 
a large number of files from Wikileaks or similar public website. (Tr. 82-83; SOR response) 
Just clicking one Internet link could result in the dump of numerous files on to a computer. 
(Tr. 82) He blamed his security office for having lax security practices and failure to 
document transit of computer drives entering and exiting the SCIF. (SOR response)       
 
  
 
4                                         
 
Transfer of Funds to Citizens and Residents of Foreign Countries 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b(vii) alleges Applicant sent $40,000 to recipients outside the United 
States via wire transfer; he sent $26,000 to a Columbian national; he sent $7,000 to a 
foreign account; and he sent funds to bullion and precious metal deposit companies. The 
bank statements showing the foreign fund transfers were discovered in 2010 when 
Applicant’s computer, hard drives, and external drives were searched for the security 
investigation involving classified information. (Tr. 80; GE 3 at 3)  
 
While Applicant was deployed to Iraq in the 2008 to 2009 period, he sent $26,000 
to his girlfriend (G) who was living in Panama. (Tr. 60-61; SOR response) Shortly 
thereafter, he suspected he was being exploited in a “romance scam,” and he ended his 
relationship with G. (Tr. 61; SOR response) 
 
 Around 2009, Applicant provided $7,000 to a woman in Columbia (S) to enable her 
to return to Columbia because her passport was stolen. (Tr. 62; SOR response) S was 
his fiancé. (SOR response) He only knew her about two months. (Tr. 62-63) In 2009, S 
completed a Foreign Born Spouse Statement of Personal History, and Applicant provided 
this document to security. (AE B) 
 
Applicant sent $40,000 to his spouse (not S) and her parents to enable them to 
make home repairs on their home in Nicaragua. (Tr. 57-58; SOR response) In 2012, his 
spouse returned to Nicaragua while Applicant was deployed to Iraq. (Tr. 59) His spouse 
now resides in the United States. (Tr. 58) Applicant admitted providing the funds to a 
Columbian national. (Tr. 56) In 2009, a Foreign Born Spouse Statement of Personal 
History was completed for his future spouse; however, the form is not signed. (AE A) A 
note on page 1 indicates it was submitted in 2009 to his security officer. (AE A) 
  
False Statement Denying Payments to Foreign Nationals 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.c alleges Applicant falsely denied that he provided financial support to 
any foreign national on his January 30, 2013 SCA. Applicant disclosed his relationships 
with his future spouse and S to his security officer; however, his disclosures did not 
contain information about him providing funds to them. (AE A; AE B) Applicant’s January 
30, 2013 SCA asks in Section 20A, “Have you EVER provided financial support for any 
foreign national?” (GE 1) (emphasis in original)  He answered, no, and he did not disclose 
on his 2013 SCA that he provided funds to his spouse, his spouse’s parents, G, and S. 
(Tr. 64; GE 1) He understood the question, and he was aware of the money he sent to 
foreign nationals. (Tr. 70) He explained that his supervisors forced him to hurry to 
complete his SCA. (Tr. 65, 71) He said he carelessly overlooked the question. (Tr. 65) It 
was an oversight and “not an intentional attempt to mislead.” (Tr. 65) 
 
 On his 2013 SCA, Applicant disclosed: his marriage to his spouse; his in-laws’ 
residence in Nicaragua; and spouse’s non-citizen status. (GE 1) His 48-page SCA is 
detailed, and includes information such as a discussion of his security violation in May 
2011; allegations against a supervisor of fraud; and complaints about a hostile work 
environment. (GE 1) 
 
 
5                                         
 
 In Applicant’s April 24, 2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), Applicant disclosed in the last four months of 2012, Applicant said 
he or his spouse transferred $10,000 to $15,000 to his in-laws in Nicaragua.3 Applicant 
said he did not disclose the information about his funds transfers “because he was 
thinking of his in-laws as U.S. persons.” (GE 2 at 4) He explained that his mother-in-law 
had a social security number, had a U.S. visa, and came to the United States three times 
a year to visit. The investigator confronted Applicant with the funds transfers in 2008 and 
2009 as alleged in in SOR ¶ 2.b(vii) and Applicant admitted the transfers. He said he 
denied the fund transfers on his SCA because he misunderstood the question, and he 
was in a hurry to complete his SCA. (GE 2 at 6) He was also embarrassed about the fund 
transfers.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
                                            
3 All of the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s April 24, 2014 Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (GE 2 at 4-6). 
 
6                                         
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information  
 
AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium; 
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view protected information outside 
one's need to know; 
 
 
7                                         
 
(e) copying or modifying protected information in an unauthorized manner 
designed to conceal or remove classification or other document control 
markings; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual's need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management; and  
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
national security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges under the handling protected information guideline that in 
February 2010, Applicant removed a hard drive from a SCIF, downloaded material on his 
computer from the hard drive, and then returned the hard drive to the SCIF without 
authorization. Applicant said he was authorized to bring hard drives into the SCIF and to 
remove hard drives from the SCIF. No evidence from witnesses, a standard operating 
procedure, or similar source was presented to contradict his statement about being 
authorized to handle the hard drives in this manner. SOR ¶ 1.a is found for Applicant. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges, and the record establishes that in 2010, a counter-intelligence 
forensic analysis on three hard drives and two portable external drives that Applicant had 
at his residence discovered over one million classified documents on this media. There 
was no evidence presented that Applicant was authorized to store classified information 
at his residence. AG ¶¶ 34(b), 34(c), and 34(g) are established.   
 
AG ¶ 35 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 
8                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 
2013), concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability of 
mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. In 2010, Applicant had three hard drives 
and two portable external drives at his residence. Over a million classified documents 
were found on this media. Applicant did not provide a credible explanation for these 
documents being on his media at his home. Handling protected information security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
AG ¶ 16 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
 
9                                         
 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a alleges the same conduct that is alleged in the previous section. This 
conduct is sufficient for an adverse determination without recourse to the personal 
conduct guideline, and AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. His conduct in SOR ¶ 2.a is 
known to security officials, and threats of public disclosure would not cause him to 
compromise classified information. AG ¶ 2.a is mitigated as a duplication. 
 
Applicant conducted Internet research and downloaded videos, pictures, and 
information on pornography, weapons, body armor, explosives, silencers, conversion of 
weapons to automatic, and other weapons’ modifications. Applicant’s research is 
constitutionally-protected conduct. He has a right under the First Amendment to obtain 
and possess such information. There is no evidence that he used the information for any 
illegal purpose. Applicant sent money to people in Central America and Columbia. Funds 
transfers are not illegal. They may raise foreign influence concerns; however, the 
transfers are not alleged under Guideline B. AG ¶ 2.b is found for Applicant because the 
financial transactions, without more information, do not independently raise a security 
concern under Guideline E. 
 
 Applicant falsely denied that he provided financial support to any foreign national 
on his January 30, 2013 SCA. He did not disclose on his 2013 SCA that he paid a total 
of over $70,000 to his spouse, his spouse’s parents, G, and S. In his OPM PSI, he said 
he did not understand the question. At his hearing, he said he understood the question. 
Applicant is intelligent. I specifically find that he understood the question, and he 
intentionally elected not to disclose accurate information about payments to foreign 
 
10                                         
 
nationals. AG ¶ 16(a) is established requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable 
in this case:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant falsely denied that he provided 
financial support to any foreign national on his January 30, 2013 SCA. He did not disclose 
on this SCA that he paid a total of over $70,000 to his spouse, his spouse’s parents, G, 
and S when they were citizens and residents of foreign countries. I do not believe his 
claim that the falsification was inadvertent or unintentional. His false statement is recent, 
serious, and not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
11                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines K and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old senior engineer. In 2006, he received a bachelor of 
science degree in information technology management.  He served in the Army from 2001 
to 2008. He completed tours in Kuwait in 2003, and Iraq in 2004 and 2006. He left active 
duty as a sergeant. After he left active duty, he deployed to Iraq for about one year 
working for two different government contractors.   
 
The evidence against granting his security clearance is more persuasive. Applicant 
had three hard drives and two portable external drives at his residence. Over a million 
classified documents were found on this media. He did not provide a credible explanation 
for these classified documents being in his possession at his residence.   
 
Applicant falsely denied that he provided financial support to any foreign national 
on his January 30, 2013 SCA. He did not disclose on his 2013 SCA that he paid a total 
of over $70,000 to his spouse, his spouse’s parents, G, and S when they were citizens 
and residents of foreign countries. His statements about carelessly overlooking the 
question; that it was an oversight; and that it was not an intentional attempt to mislead 
are not credible. His false statement on his 2013 SCA was deliberate, improper, and made 
with intent to deceive. AG ¶ 15 indicates, “Of special interest is any failure to cooperate 
or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes.” Applicant’s falsifications raise serious security concerns. The 
protection of national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes 
security, even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant 
cannot be trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information related to security issues. 
He did not establish his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Guidelines K and 
E security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
  
 
12                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
