 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-03192 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on March 23, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on June 5, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 9, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in Germany and graduated from high 
school there in 1993, and took some college courses. Applicant has been employed as 
a security engineer by a federal contractor since December 2015. He reported previous 
assignments with federal contractors going back to 2002. Applicant served honorably on 
active duty in the U.S. Army from 1993 to 2001. He reports a previous security 
clearance from his time in the service, and continuing for 20 years with no issues. 
Applicant has never married.   
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of his security clearance 
application (SCA),2 including failure to file a state B income tax return in 2007, and a 
voluntary vehicle repossession in April 2015. The SOR alleged 10 delinquent debts 
totaling $45,610. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted seven of the ten 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR, totaling $42,465. He denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.i, and 1.j, including the tax lien in the amount of $2,372 owed to State A. 
Applicant claims to have made great strides in his financial situation, but admits to living 
outside his means in the past.3 He also claims in his Answer to the SOR that he has 
reached out to experts to help him in this matter, and he has been in frequent contact 
with all of the creditors listed in the SOR to negotiate payment settlements.   
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant attached a letter from the creditor in SOR ¶ 
1.d confirming receipt of Applicant’s dispute of that $364 cable television debt. He also 
attached documents to prove that the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f was paid in full on 
September 8, 2017, and he enrolled with a debt repair agency on October 13, 2016. It is 
unclear what progress has been made by this debt repair agency concerning the 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR. Although, Applicant denied the State A tax lien 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, it is substantiated by the circuit court records attached to the 
FORM by department counsel, as well as the credit bureau report.4 Similarly, the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j are reflected as past due in the earlier 
2016 credit report. Although these delinquencies fell off the 2017 credit report, Applicant 
has provided no explanation or documentary evidence to show why. It is unclear 
whether there was a good faith resolution of these old debts, or did the creditors simply 
stop chasing him.5 Applicant admitted to all of the other SOR delinquent debts, and they 
are confirmed in his credit reports.  
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 4, 2016 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 9).  
 
2 Item 9.  
 
3 Item 2, attached statement.  
 
4 Items 3 - 7. 
 
5 Items 6 - 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling from a credit repair agency starting in 
October 2016. It is unclear what progress the agency has made on the debts alleged in 
the SOR, some of which are over a decade old. He provided no response to the FORM 
or budget showing income against expenses, or other documentation to show progress 
on his delinquent debts. He professed his intentions to repay these delinquencies in his 
un dated response to the SOR in 2017, but provided no substantiation showing results.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the new Administrative Guidelines (AGs) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. This decision is based on the new AGs. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
5 
 
 
 (f) failure to pay or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, local 
               income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or 
               local income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. Most of the delinquent debts 
have not been addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Although Applicant claims to be making smarter decisions in his spending and 
great strides in his financial situation, he has not provided any explanation how he 
became delinquent on these debts in the first place, aside from under withholding his 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
taxes for state B in 2007. He has not identified any circumstances or conditions that 
were beyond his control. He has produced no relevant or responsive documentation 
either with his Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM. He has not 
demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the 
burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR 
list 10 delinquent debts totaling $45,610. Applicant did not provide enough details with 
documentary corroboration about what he did to address his SOR debts. He did not 
provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;7 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, 
basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in 
the SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts except SOR ¶¶ 1.d (disputed) and 1.f (paid in full). 
He did not provide his budget, or any character reference letters or evidence of 
community involvement. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial problems and 
other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from 
the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
                                                          
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or his] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or he maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has served honorably for eight 
years in the U.S. Army, and he has retained a credit repair agency to help him. Most 
importantly, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR. He has not 
met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d and 1.f:                      For Applicant  
 Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
    Subparagraph 1.g through 1.j:                 Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
