                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )         ISCR  Case No.  17-01506         
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
 
Statement of Case
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect when the SOR was issued would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 2, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to another judge on March 23, 2018, and reassigned to me on April 9,
2018. The case was scheduled for hearing on May 9, 2018. The Government’s case
consisted of five exhibits. (GEs 1-5) Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 11 
exhibits. (AEs A-K) The transcript was received on May 17, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented creditor payments
and payment arrangements. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to
supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond. Within
the time permitted, Applicant submitted copies of his rehabilitation agreement with his
Department of Education (DoE) student loan lender and payments and payment
arrangements with SOR creditors ¶¶ 1.g-1.i. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as
AEs L-N.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent DoE debts
exceeding $152,000 and five consumer debts exceeding $52,000. Allegedly, these listed
debts remain unresolved and outstanding.
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations covered by
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i with explanations. He claimed that he lived within his means and was
subjected to diversions of moneys from his ex-wife that he had earmarked for payment of
his listed creditors. He claimed that he has eliminated all home expenses and is in the
process of getting a divorce. He further claimed that he deferred to his wife to take care of
the monies he would send home for payment of his bills while he was away. And, he
claimed that he was betrayed by the trust he placed in his ex-wife.
Addressing his student loan debts, Applicant claimed that he has a lawyer handling
his property settlement with his ex-wife and expected his liability for his student loans to
be equally apportioned between himself and his ex-wife in accordance with his state’s
community property law. He further claimed that once his pro-rata share is established,
he will be able to settle his student loan accounts. And, he claimed he paid off the debts
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g-1.h and is making monthly payments on the debts
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i.
2
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old pilot (Tr. 60) for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR are denied and will be addressed
with findings that follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 1993 and divorced in July 2007.  (GEs 1-2) He has one
stepchild from this marriage.  He remarried in December 2008 and divorced in December
2017. (GEs 1-2 and AE B; Tr. 66) He has one stepchild from this marriage. (GEs 1-2)
Applicant earned a bachelors degree in July 2006 and attended the same institution’s
medical school between August 2006 and October 2013. However, he did not obtain a
medical degree. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 60-61) Applicant did not report any military service. (GEs 1-
2)
Applicant’s finances
Between October 2006 and September 2010, Applicant took out four government-
guaranteed student loans, mostly to finance his medical education. (GEs 2-5 and AEs C
and L; Tr. 46, 62-63) These loans were subsequently transferred to DoE and ultimately to
the collection agent referenced in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 46, 49-55)  Altogether,
his DoE loans exceeded $152,000 and became delinquent in December 2014. (GEs 2-5
and AE C) Currently, he owes $246,520, inclusive of accrued interest on his loans. (AEs
D and N) In May 2018, Applicant completed a rehabilitation agreement with a collection
agent for DoE. Under the terms of his rehabilitation agreement, Applicant is obligated to
make monthly payments of $684 a month beginning in May 2018. (AE N) Because
Applicant could not at this time provide a copy of his divorce settlement agreement, no
determination can be made of whether Applicant and his wife were able to split his
student loan obligations in accordance with community property rules recognized in his
state. (AE A Tr.  56) While he expects the split to be resolved soon, he could not provide
any reliable estimates. (Tr. 50-57)
Applicant attributed his delinquent student loan debts to his ex-wife’s diversion of
the funds Applicant transmitted to her for discharge of his student loan debts. (Tr. 68-69)
Based on Applicant’s documentation, he is in compliance with his rehabilitation
agreement.
Besides his student loans, Applicant accumulated several delinquent consumer
debts. They are covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($15,912); 1.f ($13,781); 1.g ($12,542); 1.h
($7,102); and 1.i ($3,553). Applicant has since paid off three of the listed debts: SOR
creditor 1.e with a $6,365 payment (AE F) and SOR creditors 1g and 1.h with a
settlement agreement for less than the full amounts due. (AE M) For two of the remaining 
listed debts (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h), he completed a settlement agreement in May
2018 for less than the total amounts owed for the two accounts. (AE M) Addressing the
remaining debts listed in the SOR, (SOR debt ¶ 1. f), Applicant documented a settlement
3
agreement with the creditor for the balance owing as follows: 12 monthly payments of
$500 due in June 2018 and monthly payments of $250 for the remaining 11 months until
fully paid. (AE G) He provided documentary proof, too, of a settlement agreement with
creditor 1.i that provides for monthly payments of $100, beginning in October 2017. (AE I)
Applicant is credited with being in compliance with his payment agreement. (AEs G and 
K) 
Applicant nets $5,077 a month from his employment as a pilot.  (AE J) His pay
statements reflect bi-monthly garnishment deductions of $1,937 since October 2017 by
his student loan creditor. (AE J)
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
4
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s historical accumulation of
delinquent student loan and consumer debts. Applicant’s accumulated debt
delinquencies warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, evaluation of an applicant’s delinquent debts are critical to an
assessment of the applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following
rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to
holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited
disputes with his ex-wife over payment responsibilities for the listed student loan and
consumer debts afford some grounds for crediting him with extenuating circumstances.
Based on his cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” partially applies to
Applicant’s situation.
To his credit, Applicant has entered into a rehabilitation agreement with the
collection agent for his student loans and has resolved his consumer debts covered by
SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.i Based on his most recent payment initiatives with his listed creditors,
Applicant  may claim the mitigation benefits of the “acting responsibly” prong of  MC ¶
20(b), as well as the benefits of other applicable mitigating conditions.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” is fully applicable.  See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App.
Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
In Applicant’s case, he has addressed his listed student loan and consumer debts and
resolved them with payoffs (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g-1.h) and satisfactory payment
arrangements with SOR creditors 1.a, 1.f and 1.i. 
6
Whole-Person Assessment
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability,
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the financial issues raised in the
SOR, but the contributions he has made to his employer and the defense industry in
general.  Favorable credit is also warranted for the corrective steps Applicant has taken
with his creditors. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances are
promising and enable him to overcome any reasonable doubts about his
trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.
Conclusions are warranted that his finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to
meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. Financial
concerns are mitigated. 
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e.  Criteria for
meeting the eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance are satisfied.   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:                           For Applicant
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
  
9
