 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01735 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 13, 2018, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 30, 2018. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 4-8 (Items 1-3 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 
12, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or submit any 
documentary evidence. Items 4-8 are admitted into evidence without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on July 25, 2018.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel moves to amend the SOR to withdraw SOR 
¶¶ 1.v and 1.w because they are duplicates of other allegations. The motion is granted 
and those two allegations are withdrawn.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted part of the allegations and denied other allegations in her 
answer to the SOR. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She has worked for a defense contractor since 2015. 
She was unemployed from June 2015 to October 2015. She has a high school diploma 
and is a certified nursing assistant (CNA). She is divorced and has three adult children.1  
  
 The SOR alleges 28 delinquent debts (judgments, collections, past due and 
charged-off accounts) totaling approximately $25,000. The debts are supported by 
credit reports from November 2015, March 2017, and March 2018, her statement to an 
investigator in May 2016, and her SOR admissions in her answer from February 2018. 
The SOR also alleged that she falsified her security clearance application from October 
2015 when she failed to affirmatively respond to questions about whether she defaulted 
on any loan, whether she had any debts turned over to a collection company, whether 
she had any charged-off or collection accounts, or whether she was 120 days 
delinquent on any debt.2 
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to her period of unemployment and to 
being a single mother. Applicant documented payments for SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.x. She 
claimed to also have paid SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.s, but failed to supply supporting 
documentation. As for the remaining debts, Applicant failed to produce any 
documentation showing payments, establishment of payment plans, or any other 
correspondence reflecting responsible interaction with her creditors. She also failed to 
produce documentation supporting any of her disputed debts. Except for SOR ¶¶ 1.t 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 1-2, 5-8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
and 1.x, Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling.3 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted falsifying her security clearance 
application. During her background interview, she stated she did not know about the 
debts when she completed her application. Credit reports show that most of the debts 
were delinquent for a number of years (2014-2016).4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
3 Items 2, 5-8. 
 
4 Items 2, 5-7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Most of Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unpaid or unresolved. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and most remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant presented some evidence that the debts were due to 
circumstances beyond her control (unemployment and being a single mother). She did 
not show that she took responsible action to attempt to resolve her debts. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies. Other than paying two debts, Applicant failed to provide 
documentation showing any efforts to contact the remaining creditors and set up 
payment plans, or make payments on the listed debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling and no indications that her financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant failed to document 
her disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 In her SOR answer Applicant admitted that she intentionally omitted information 
about her delinquent debts when she completed her SCA. I conclude that she 
intentionally withheld this information when she completed her SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Honestly completing an SCA is the initial crucial step in gaining access to 
classified information. The Government expects, and must rely on, the honesty of 
applicants during this process. Therefore, providing false information at this stage is not 
a minor offense. Such deliberate action casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s period of 
unemployment and her single-parent status. However, I also considered that Applicant 
failed to document actions to resolve most of her delinquent debt. She also failed to 
present documentation addressing her disputed debt. Applicant has not established a 
track record of financial stability. She provided false information about her finances on 
her security clearance application.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a–1.s:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.t, 1.x:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.u:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.v–1.w:    Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.y–1.dd:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
