 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01765 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated 
concerns raised by his delinquent debt and a 2016 incident of criminal conduct. 
Applicant’s continued access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and criminal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on June 11, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 19, 2018. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE E and F, which 
are also admitted without objection.2  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 37, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
April 2014. He was initially granted access to classified information during his military 
service. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from June 2000 to June 2003 
and in the Army Reserve from June 2003 to March 2007. He completed his most recent 
security clearance application in December 2015. Based on Applicant’s disclosures and 
information developed during the background investigation, the SOR alleges that 
Applicant owes approximately $30,000 in delinquent debt, and that in June 2016, he 
was found guilty of child endangerment and simple assault charges and was sentenced 
to probation until June 2018.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2013. After he left active duty military 
service, Applicant continued living and working overseas. His wife and children lived in 
his wife’s home country while Applicant worked for federal contracting companies in the 
Middle East and Asia. In total, Applicant lived apart from his family for seven years 
before being laid off in February 2013. For the next year, Applicant was unemployed 
and tried to find another job. During his unemployment, Applicant’s family relied on their 
savings and the revenue from his wife’s two businesses. However, because of ongoing 
road construction eliminating access to the businesses, both business were forced to 
close by the end of 2013. After losing that source of income, Applicant began to rely on 
the credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to help pay his family’s living expenses. Applicant 
decided to return to the United States to find employment. He worked a temporary job 
for two months before he began working his current job April 2014, earning $23 per 
hour, or approximately $48,000 annually. He sent the majority of his earnings to his 
wife. He did so for almost a year as his wife and stepson waited for their visas to enter 
the United States.4  
                                                          
2 HE II. 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 18-21; GE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s wife and three children, then ages 18, 11, and 10, lived in close 
proximity to his wife’s family.  When they moved to the United States in February 2015, 
they moved to an unfamiliar country with no close family or other support network. It 
was also the first time since 2007 that the family lived together for an extended period 
time. The couple had a fourth child in 2016 and incurred at least $2,000 in medical 
expenses related to her birth. Applicant continued to support his family on one income 
and did not have extra funds to pay toward his delinquent accounts.5  
 
 After the move, Applicant’s middle son began exhibiting behavioral problems. 
Around March 2016, the boy, then 11, pushed his sister’s head into a wall and 
threatened to stab her. Applicant spanked him on the buttocks with a belt. The next day 
at school, a teacher overheard Applicant’s daughter teasing her brother about the 
incident. The school intervened and contacted child-protective services. While at the 
hospital having the boy examined, the police arrested Applicant. Pending the resolution 
of the case, Applicant could not have contact with his family. He had to secure and pay 
for housing, while maintaining the family home. In June 2016, Applicant was found guilty 
of child endangerment and simple assault. He was placed in a deferred adjudication 
program. He was required to attend parenting classes and obtain a mental-health 
evaluation to determine if he required anger-management classes. Based on the results 
of the evaluation, he was not required to do so. He was also ordered to pay over $1,000 
in court costs and fines. He complied with the terms of his probation and was released 
from supervision in June 2017, with a recommendation from his probation officer that 
the charges against him be dismissed. In April 2018, the court dismissed all charges 
and expunged the matter from his criminal history record.6  
 
 Since the incident, Applicant’s son has been diagnosed with a 
neurodevelopmental-type disorder that impacts the child’s ability to control his behavior. 
Although Applicant and his wife have declined to medicate their son, they try to manage 
his symptoms with diet and activity. The family has also developed a strong support 
system through their church. The family is actively involved in a number of ministries 
and are held high esteem by members of the congregation. The church’s pastor 
counseled Applicant’s son weekly between May and December 2016. The pastor 
continues to check in with the boy on a regular basis after church and in Applicant’s 
home. Applicant believes it has helped his son to have someone outside the family with 
whom discuss his feelings and concerns. Applicant also believes he received helpful 
information through the parenting class. Applicant acknowledges that because he 
worked and lived separately from his children for so many years when they were small, 
that he did not really know how to connect with them. He credits the parenting class with 
giving him the skills to connect with and guide his son when he experiences emotional 
and behavioral difficulties.7  
                                                          
5 Tr. 21, 32, 42-44. 
 
6 Tr. 23-29,36,41; GE 4; AE A.  
 
7 Tr. 34-35, 37-40; AE F.  
 
 
4 
 
The credit reports in the record show that Applicant maintained a favorable credit 
history until he was laid off in February 2013. Just as Applicant’s home life is improving, 
so are his finances. In April 2017, he paid off the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($180) 
and 1.c ($78), which were unidentified medical debts. Through due diligence, he located 
the creditor and resolved the accounts. He also paid SOR ¶ 1.d ($66). He attempted to 
negotiate a payment plan with the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($29,851), but the 
creditor wanted more than he could afford. However, in June 2018, Applicant started a 
job, earning $30 per hour. His wife also returned to work part time. She works 20 hours 
a week and earns $12 per hour. This increases Applicant’s household income to 
approximately $75,000 annually. He anticipates that once his wife learns to drive, she 
will be able to work more shifts during the week, increasing their household income. 
After starting his new job, Applicant contacted the creditor holding SOR ¶ 1.a and made 
a $300 payment toward the debt.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
8 Tr. 21-23, 30, 41-42, 45. GE 2-3; AE B-E. 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.9 The record 
establishes the Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations. As the sole provider for family of six between 2014 and 
2018, Applicant also had an inability to pay his delinquent accounts.10 However, 
Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate these concerns.   
 
Applicant, who did not experience financial problems until 2013, did not incur 
delinquent debt under circumstances that indicate reckless or irresponsible behavior. 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond his control beginning with 
his loss of employment in February 2013 and the loss of his wife’s income that same 
year. The financial problems that Applicant experienced after he returned to work in 
2014 reflects the difficulty of providing for a family of six on a single income. However, 
Applicant acted responsibly in light of his circumstances.11  
 
Applicant moved his family from their overseas location to a city in the United 
States, where he could find employment. He also paid off delinquent accounts as he 
was able, including SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.c. Furthermore, he has demonstrated a 
willingness to resolve his delinquent accounts. 
 
 Applicant attempted to negotiate a payment plan, albeit unsuccessfully, with his 
largest creditor (SOR ¶ 1.a). He successfully identified the unnamed creditors alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c and resolved those accounts. After being unable to negotiate an 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
11 AG ¶20(b).   
 
6 
 
affordable payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, he made a $300 payment 
toward the debt after staring a higher paying job in June 2018. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
finances should improve now that he and his wife have accepted new positions that will 
increase their household income by $2,000 each month.  
 
Although the outstanding delinquent account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is sizeable 
and remains unpaid, that fact alone, is not dispositive of Applicant’s security worthiness. 
The purpose of a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts. Rather the 
purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an 
affirmative determination that the personal is an acceptable security risk.”12 Here, 
Applicant’s financial problems do not raise any behavior that indicates poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules and regulations that may hinder his 
ability to properly handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
Criminal activity calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
law, rules, and regulations, as well as a doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness.13 In 2016, Applicant was found guilty of child endangerment and 
simple assault after using corporal punishment to discipline his then 11-year-old-son, 
which is disqualifying. The SOR also alleges that Applicant is on probation until June 
2018.14   
Between 2015 and 2016, Applicant family was dealing with several difficult 
issues, including an international move, learning how to live together as a family unit for 
the first time in many years, and his middle son’s undiagnosed neurodevelopmental 
disorder. At that time, Applicant did not have the tools to handle these issues, in 
particular his son’s violent outbursts toward his younger sibling, and resorted to the use 
of corporal punishment. 
 However, Applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation.15 He completed 
the terms of his deferred adjudication program, was released from supervision a year 
early in June 2017, and the incident has been expunged from his criminal record. Now, 
Applicant and his wife have more insight to their son’s behavior and actively try to 
manage his symptoms. Having completed parenting classes as part of his sentencing, 
Applicant feels he is better able to interact with his son. Applicant and his wife have 
established a support network through their church. This incident is a single act of 
misconduct that was out of character for Applicant. He has no history of criminal 
behavior or anger-management issues. Given emotional and economic hardship the 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
13 AG ¶ 30. 
 
14 AG ¶¶ 31(b). 
 
15 AG ¶ 32(d). 
 
7 
 
incident caused Applicant and his family, it is unlikely that Applicant will engage in 
similar conduct in the future.16  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ongoing security 
worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors 
at AG ¶ 2(d). He has held a security clearance for many years without incident. While 
those granted access to classified information are held to a high standard of conduct, 
they are not held to a standard of perfection. Security clearance adjudications are not 
meant to punish applicants for past misconduct, but rather to determine if an applicant’s 
past actions are indicative of a current inability to properly handle and protect classified 
information. Neither Applicant’s financial issues nor his 2016 incident with his son are 
indicative of his inability to properly handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 32(a). 
