1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 17-00939 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern generated 
by her delinquent debts and tax returns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, alleging several delinquent 
debts and explaining why they generate security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2017, requesting a hearing. She neither 
admitted nor denied the debts alleged, but contended that they had all been satisfied or 
deleted from her credit report. I will construe her responses as denials. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on April 13, 2018. On June 1, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for June 21, 2018. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. I received six Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 6) and 
considered Applicant’s testimony. Also, Department Counsel amended the SOR at hearing, 
adding subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o. (Tr. 30) Applicant did not object and admitted the 
supplementary allegations. 
 
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open until July 12, 2018, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit documentation. She submitted nothing. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on June 29, 2018. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old woman with four adult children. She was married 
previously from 1985 to 1995. (GE 1 at 15) The marriage ended in divorce. She is a high 
school graduate who has earned some college credits. For the past 13 years, she has 
worked for various defense contractors as a technician analyst. (Tr. 13; GE 1 at 11) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant began falling behind on her income tax return filings. This 
occurred because of miscommunication with her ex-husband that resulted in both of them 
claiming their children as deductions during the same years. The IRS contacted her in 
2008, informing her that, in addition to being behind on her income tax filings, she owed a 
delinquency. (Tr. 16)  Applicant then began working with the IRS to develop a payment 
plan. By 2010, the delinquency totaled $30,392, as alleged in subparagraph 1.a. (Tr. 20) 
That year, the IRS filed a lien against Applicant’s property for the delinquent amount. (Tr. 
21) Applicant contends that the filing delay occurred because her ex-husband died in 2008, 
complicating her ability to obtain his income tax records. (Tr. 17)  Applicant testified that 
she satisfied the lien through 18 monthly payments. (Tr. 15) She provided no evidence 
supporting this contention.  
  
 Applicant has not filed any federal or state income tax returns since 2012, as alleged 
in subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o. (Tr. 23) She is working with an uncertified accountant to 
prepare these returns. (Tr. 24)  
 
 The remainder of the SOR delinquencies are medical bills. Applicant has 
periodically had trouble keeping up with her medical expenses, as some of her employers 
had insurance plans that did not cover her medical expenses. (Tr. 26) Subparagraph 1.b is 
a judgment for $4,375. Applicant contends that she has paid it, but the supporting 
3 
 
documentary evidence is unclear. (Answer at 4) The remaining medical debts, as alleged 
in subparagraphs 1.c through 1.m, are co-pays totaling $123. Applicant paid these debts. 
(Answer at 6; Tr. 26) 
 
 Applicant earns $56,200 annually. (Tr. 27) She has approximately $2,000 deposited 
in a savings account. (Tr. 29)  
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
4 
 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant satisfied the medical bills alleged in subparagraphs 1.c through 1.m. I 
resolve these allegations in her favor. Applicant also contends that she satisfied the 
medical judgment alleged in subparagraph 1.b; however, the supporting documentation is 
unclear.  This judgment, together with Applicant’s delinquent income taxes and unfiled 
income tax returns trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to 
satisfy debts;” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and AG ¶ 19(f), 
“failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or  
failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax, as required.” 
 
 Applicant’s problems with her income tax returns stemmed from miscommunication 
with her ex-husband, who, unbeknownst to her, claimed their minor children for deduction 
purposes on his tax returns during the same years that she claimed them. Her ability to 
resolve the tax controversy was complicated by her ex-husband’s death in 2008. Her 
medical bills stemmed from health problems that occurred when she worked for an 
employer with inferior health-care coverage.  Under these circumstances, the first prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control . . . “ applies.  
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant produced no evidence supporting her contention that she has satisfied the 
tax delinquency or the medical judgment. Moreover, she has yet to file federal or state 
income tax returns for 2013 through 2017. Neither the second prong of AG ¶ 20(b), nor any 
of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Incurring delinquent income taxes and failing to file income tax returns poses a 
security risk that is more serious than incurring commercial delinquencies, as it indicates 
that Applicant may “have a problem abiding by well-established rules and regulations.” 
(ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (June 15, 2016) at 4). Moreover, given that Applicant has not 
filed any income tax returns in more than five years, her financial problems are not under 
control. Given the nature and seriousness of Applicant’s financial problems and the lack of 
any plan to resolve them, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
