 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03393 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the Financial 
Considerations and Personal Conduct guidelines related to his history of excessive 
indebtedness and failure to disclose his debts. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2016, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 17, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the Financial Considerations and 
Personal Conduct guidelines. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent Directive 
 
2 
 
 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implemented 
effective June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on October 28, 2017. He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on January 4, 2018 and reassigned me on January 25, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 
6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 14, 2018. The Government 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
March 21, 2018. The record was left open for the receipt of additional evidence until June 
14, 2018. The Government submitted GE 4, and Applicant submitted AE C through AE 
F. GE 4 and AE C through AE F were admitted without objection. The record then closed.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR issued to 
Applicant to correct a typographical error. The date of the e-QIP, identified in SOR ¶ 2.a 
was incorrectly alleged as December 23, 2015. The Government moved to amend that 
date to December 1, 2016, to conform to the evidence. Applicant had no objection to the 
amendment and I granted the motion. (Tr. 11.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He has been employed by a government contractor for 
the past 16 years. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2000. He married in 2005. They have 
one minor son. (GE 1.)  
 
 In SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, Applicant was alleged to be indebted to three creditors 
in the amount of $22,376. He admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, but denied SOR 
¶ 1.c. His debts were listed on his March 23, 2017 credit report. (GE 3.) 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a decline in his wife’s business. She 
started a business in 2006. Applicant trusted her to maintain that business and their 
household finances. She acquired credit cards in their names, which she used for 
business purchases. The business made money until approximately 2013, when her 
income declined. She closed the business in 2016. Applicant was unaware of her 
delinquent business accounts until 2017. Applicant exhausted his savings trying to pay 
their debts. He relied on credit cards to make ends meet. Their financial problems grew 
until Applicant was able to sell his home in July 2017. (Tr. 21-38.)  
 
Applicant was indebted to a bank on a collection account in the amount of $17,267, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s March 2018 credit report reflected the date “major 
delinquency reported” as February 2017. (GE 3; GE 4.) Applicant presented a letter from 
 
3 
 
 
the collection agent for this creditor showing the account was paid in full. The letter was 
dated May 14, 2018. It is resolved. (AE C.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a bank on a collection account in the amount of $5,047, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s March 2018 credit report reflected the date “major 
delinquency reported” as May 2016. (GE 4.) Applicant entered into a settlement 
agreement to resolve this debt for a payment of $1,263. He documented that he made 
that payment to the collection agent on March 23, 2018. This debt is resolved. (AE E; Tr. 
41-44.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $62, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant’s March 2017 credit report reflects the last action on this account 
was in January 2016, with a report date of March 2017. (GE 3) This debt was for 
Applicant’s son’s eye doctor visit. He credibly averred that this debt was repaid via check 
about a month prior to the hearing. This debt no longer appears on his credit report. It is 
resolved. (GE 4; Tr. 45-46.) 
 
Applicant plans to divorce his wife. He no longer trusts her with their finances and 
believes she is frivolous with finances. (Tr. 64-67, 91.) He has reduced expenses, sold 
his family’s residence, and paid off all delinquent accounts. He drives a modest used 
vehicle that is fully paid off. He only has one credit card and keeps a low balance on it. 
He has sufficient income to cover his monthly expenses. His March 2018 credit report 
reflects no new past-due accounts. (Tr. 64-66.) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant failed to disclose his delinquent consumer 
accounts in Section 26 of his e-QIP. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his December 
2016 e-QIP. At the time he completed his e-QIP, his wife was deceiving him about the 
delinquent business accounts. She told him she had them under control. He did not 
exercise due diligence in investigating their financial situation at that time. (Tr. 77-78, 84.) 
He explained that he knew of other financial accounts that he had missed payments on 
and was embarrassed about them, but that those accounts he was aware of did not rise 
to the level of being 90 or 120 days past due, and had not been placed for collections at 
the time he completed the e-QIP. He later learned of the delinquent business debts, which 
he voluntarily disclosed to an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) during 
his April 2017 interview. His credit report reflected that the major delinquency on the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was not reported until after he completed his e-QIP. While the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b has a last action dated of January 2016, Applicant was ignorant of 
that delinquency when he completed the e-QIP. Similarly, he was ignorant of the medical 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, as his wife claimed it had been paid. He did not intentionally 
falsify his e-QIP. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 79-87.) 
 
Applicant’s performance review reflects he “maintains excellent performance” and 
his “overall leadership characteristics for the company are strong.” Additionally, six 
professional associates from Applicant’s place of employment wrote letters of support 
attesting to his trustworthiness and professionalism. (AE D; AE F.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had three delinquent debts totaling $22,376. His debts became 
delinquent between 2016 and the present. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are attributable to a decline is his wife’s business and her 
mismanagement of their finances. Since learning of their delinquencies, Applicant has 
sold his home, decreased expenditures, and repaid all delinquent accounts. He now 
exercises control over his finances. He does not trust his wife to manage their finances 
 
6 
 
 
and intends to file for divorce. Future financial problems are unlikely. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 
20(d) provide mitigation. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant credibly testified that he did not disclose his alleged delinquent debts on 
his e-QIP because he was unaware of them. His wife hid the depth of their financial 
problems from him. When he became aware of their growing delinquencies, he discussed 
them openly with the OPM investigator. His omissions were intentional. The evidence is 
insufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked for his 
employer for 16 years. He is respected by his colleagues for his truthfulness and is highly 
rated on evaluations. He demonstrated responsible action over the past two years with 
respect to his financial accounts, by resolving all delinquencies and reducing 
expenditures. The record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines F and E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
National security eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
