1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
CORRECTED COPY 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-04207 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On December 22, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F. On 
January 25, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  
On April 20, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me. On April 2, 2018, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for May 11, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any documents. I held the record open until June 
8, 2018 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant 
did not submit any post-hearing evidence and the record closed. On May 23, 2018, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old test technical surveillance instructor employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2017. He seeks to retain his security clearance 
as a condition of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 11-12)  
 
Applicant completed high school through a home-school program in June 2001. 
(GE 1; Tr. 12-13) Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 2001 to 
June 2015 and was medically retired as a staff sergeant (pay grade E-6). He receives 
a 100% Veterans Affairs (VA) disability rating. While Applicant was in the Marine 
Corps, he deployed six times -- twice to Iraq, once to Afghanistan, and the remaining 
three deployments were throughout Africa and Southeast Asia. It was in Falluja, Iraq 
in 2004 that he received a severe gunshot wound to the right brachial artery that 
ultimately led to his being discharged from the Marine Corps after he developed 
thoracic-outlet syndrome. (Tr. 13-16, 48-49) 
 
Applicant was married from 2003 to 2017, which ended by divorce. He has two 
minor children from that marriage and pays $1,450 in monthly child support. Applicant 
remarried in 2018 and his wife is currently a full-time student working on her master’s 
degree in psychology. (Tr. 17-20) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 13 debts totaling $32,137. Applicant admits in part and denies 
in part these debts. The five largest debts consist of a $1,746 past-due mortgage, two 
repossessed automobile loans with balances due of $11,360 and $12,674, a $1,922 
delinquent medical account, and a $1,338 charged-off residual balance owed on a car 
totaled in an accident. The remaining eight delinquent accounts are all under $1,000. 
These debts are substantiated in the Government’s exhibits. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.m; GE 1 
– 4) 
 
Applicant traces his financial difficulties to his first marriage and subsequent 
divorce. He stated his former spouse was responsible for paying the family bills and 
for reasons unknown failed to do so. He stated, “I think it just kind of blindsided me.” 
(Tr. 21-22) Applicant was also unemployed for nine months following his medical 
retirement from the Marine Corps. (GE 1; Tr. 49)  
 
Department Counsel questioned Applicant regarding each of the SOR debts. 
Applicant claimed that his debts were resolved, being resolved, or being disputed. 
However, he did not provide any documentation corroborating his explanations in his 
SOR Answer or in his testimony. As noted, he did not submit any post-hearing 
evidence. (SOR answer; Tr. 22-38) After initially questioning Applicant about his 
debts, Department Counsel reviewed his debts again to ensure he understood what 
post-hearing documentation was required. (Tr. 38-40)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant lives in a rental home and is current on all of his bills except for those 
alleged in his SOR. He is also current on filing his state and federal income tax 
returns. Applicant took an online credit counseling course “maybe two months ago.” 
(Tr. 41-44) In addition to his VA disability pension, which is “about $3,500 a month,” 
Applicant earns approximately $68,000 a year from his employer. (Tr. 20) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
In his SOR Answer, Applicant submitted a personal statement and two work-
related reference letters. Applicant discussed his upbringing, his entry into the Marine 
Corps, his service in the Marine Corps, and his life post-Marine Corps. His work-
related references speak highly of Applicant and recount his service to his country. His 
references view Applicant as a valued employee, who is patriotic, trustworthy, 
dedicated, and hard working. The two references recommend Applicant for a security 
clearance. (SOR Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security 
decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
In ISCR Case No. 09-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s 
obligations under [Directive] ¶ E.31.14 for pertinent allegations. At that 
point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is 
not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The Government established the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and 
                                                          
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully applicable. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient documentation relating to any of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such 
as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;2 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) 
other evidence of progress or resolution. Lastly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the 
existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
                                                                                                                                                                                       
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating 
condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under 
all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been 
gainfully employed, and he is presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. 
Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his financial problems are being 
addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to classified information. 
Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. 
Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
