 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-02230 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Personal conduct security concerns and drug involvement and substance misuse 
security concerns are not mitigated. Applicant repeatedly used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. He has signed letters of intent several times that he would not use 
any illegal drug in the future. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On April 3, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1. On August 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; and 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs). Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement and substance misuse) and E (personal conduct).  
 
 
2                                         
 
On September 15, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR and requested 
a hearing. HE 3.  On March 15, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On April 11, 2018, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting 
the hearing for July 12, 2018. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
seven exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Transcript (Tr.) 9-13; GE 1-5; AE A-G.  On July 19, 2018, DOHA received a 
copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations. HE 3. He also 
provided mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old executive for an entity providing services, and his current 
employer has employed him for about 30 years. Tr. 15. In 1981, he graduated from high 
school.  He attended college for two years, and he received a diploma from a technical 
institute in 1985. He has been married for 30 years, and he has adult children and 
grandchildren. He has held a security clearance since 1998. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges, and he admitted, that he used marijuana, with varying 
frequency, from approximately July 1999 to approximately September 2000, while holding 
a security clearance, and from approximately January 2008 to 2010, while holding a top 
secret security clearance. In 2001, in a signed sworn statement, Applicant averred that 
he had no intention of using any illegal substance in the future. During a 2010  
investigative interview, Applicant stated that he had no intention of using marijuana in the 
future. Applicant continued using marijuana in at least December 2012, while holding a 
top secret security clearance. Finally, the SOR alleges that during a December 12, 2016 
investigative interview, Applicant stated that he was aware that marijuana was an illegal 
drug and he was prohibited from using it while holding a clearance. 
 
In Section 23 of Applicant’s April 2016 SCA, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug 
Activity, he disclosed “[smoked marijuana roughly 5 years ago at a neighborhood party 
use of marijuana (once over the past 7 years)”   GE 1. He said, “I do not have an addictive 
personality and am not dependent on any drugs or alcohol.” Tr.18.  
 
With respect to the SOR allegations, SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f, which are discussed 
in detail below, are not allegations of a disqualifying conduct, but rather allege evidence 
of conduct. Therefore, SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f are resolved for Applicant. 
 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3                                         
 
As to SOR 1.a, Applicant used marijuana from July 1999 to September 2000, while 
holding a security clearance. He described it as minor usage. In his answer to the SOR, 
he stated that he used it only once in a social setting. At the hearing, he stated that it was 
about two to four times over a period of four or five years or maybe longer than that in 
terms of the period of time. Tr. 18. He stated that it did not have an impact or role in his 
daily life, and he admits that it was wrong to use marijuana in any capacity. In September 
2001, in a signed sworn statement, Applicant stated that he had no intention of using any 
illegal substance in the future. (SOR 1.b) In that sworn statement, he stated that he 
smoked marijuana on three occasions at the homes of friends during that time period. GE 
5. 
 
As to SOR 1.c, Applicant continued to use marijuana from January 2008 to 
approximately September 2010, while holding a top secret security clearance. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he used marijuana only one time in a social 
setting. At the hearing, when questioned, Applicant stated that over the entire time span 
from 1999 to today, he believed it was two to four times. But there may have been a fifth 
time. He emphasized that was over a 20-year period. Tr. 20 However, in his 2010 SCA, 
he stated that he used marijuana four to five times in the period from 2008 to 2010. GE 
3. In the 2010 investigative interview, Applicant stated that he had no intention of using 
marijuana in the future. GE 4. He stated that it was used at neighborhood parties. (SOR 
1.d) 
 
As to SOR 1.e, Applicant admitted that he used marijuana in December 2012, 
while holding a security clearance. He stated that it was on the New Year’s holiday in his 
answer to the SOR. He stated that was the last time that he used marijuana and had no 
intention to do so in the future. 
 
As to SOR 1.f, in 2016 Applicant told the investigative agent that he was aware 
that marijuana was an illegal drug and that he was prohibited from using it while holding 
a clearance. In that same 2016 interview, he stated his intent to never use an illegal drug. 
He mentioned further that he had never used illegal drugs at any other time while holding 
a security clearance. GE2 
 
Applicant admitted that he made a series of poor choices from 2008 to 2012, during 
which he used marijuana on two to four occasions. He noted that it was foolhardy and 
immature. He is remorseful and takes full responsibility for his past mistakes. He spends 
his time with family and is living a family-focused life style. He asks that the whole-person 
concept be used as a considerable mitigation in his case. He has excellent work 
references and has received great reviews. He submitted five character letters. AE C-G. 
He presented three witnesses who praised his dedication and achievements during the 
past 25 years. He was instrumental in helping to restructure, when the Pentagon was 
attacked in 2001. Applicant was described as a good family man who also took care of 
his parents and his father-in-law. A personal and professional friend who has known 
Applicant for ten years considers him a man of integrity. Each witness attested to 
Applicant’s trustworthiness. Tr.44-62.  
 
Applicant signed a letter of intent not to use any illegal substance in 2001 and 
2010. However after he signed the letters of intent, Applicant continued to use marijuana 
 
4                                         
 
on a varying basis.  He submitted a 2017 letter of intent at the hearing. AE B. In October 
2010, he told the investigator that he would never use the illegal drug again.  And yet, in 
2012 Applicant once again used marijuana. These marijuana uses were during a time 
that Applicant possessed a security clearance. At the hearing, he noted that one of the 
times he used marijuana was at his home. Tr. 39 Also, he noted that he still sees some 
of the people that he smoked marijuana with, but infrequently since he has moved. Tr. 
40. Applicant’s testimony revealed that he used marijuana about three or four times 
between 1999 and 2012.  During his earlier SCA and interviews he noted a greater 
number of times. Tr. 43. Applicant disclosed the use of marijuana on his SCA applications, 
but there is no evidence that he informed his FSO.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges that Applicant engaged in the same conduct under the 
personal conduct guideline as alleged under the drug involvement and substance misuse 
guideline in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f.  
 
Applicant describes himself as an honest and trustworthy person. AE A He has 
never been charged with a crime. He provided many character references and witnesses 
on his behalf. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
 
5                                         
 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement and substance 
misuse: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition),” “(c) illegal 
possession of a controlled substance . . .,” and “(f) any illegal drug use while granted 
 
6                                         
 
access to classified information or holding a sensitive position.” Applicant possessed and 
used marijuana.2 His illegal drug possession and use occurred when he possessed a 
security clearance. He was in his 40s and 50s. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(f) are 
established.  
 
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
                                            
 2 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also e.g., 
Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7                                         
 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. From approximately 1998 to 2012, 
Applicant used marijuana on a varying basis. It is not clear exactly how many times he 
actually smoked marijuana. He used marijuana in his home. His illegal marijuana 
possession and use occurred while he held a security clearance, although he did not 
divulge that information to his FSO. He even stated in the investigative interview that there 
was only the one period of time that he used marijuana. On several occasions he signed 
a letter of intent, but still used marijuana after that time. That speaks to his judgment and 
reliability. He sometimes still sees the people with whom he smoked marijuana.   
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”3 
 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, 
and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage of 
three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the 
administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of law, 
the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply that 
mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR Case 
No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a rational 
basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at alcohol 
rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the administrative 
judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency analysis of an 
administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
8                                         
 
In his SOR response, Applicant provided a clear resolution not to use marijuana in 
the future. He recognized the adverse impact of drug abuse in connection with access to 
a security clearance. However, he has signed letters of intent or told investigators at least 
twice that he would refrain from future drug use in 2001, 2010 and 2016. He also 
understands that possession of marijuana is illegal. It is not unreasonable to expect 
Applicant to demonstrate his ability to adhere to his expressed intent to refrain from drugs 
for the period of time beginning with 2017 and not 2012, when he last used marijuana.  I 
have doubts about Applicant’s statement that he intends to to abstain from illegal drug 
possession and use as truthful. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his possession and use of 
illegal drugs.4  
    
AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) are not fully applicable. AG ¶ 26(b) does not fully 
apply. He provided “a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility.” However, he has signed a similar letter in 2001 
and 2010. Applicant somewhat minimized the seriousness of his illegal marijuana 
possession and use, equating it to a mistake that he deeply regrets.  Applicant has made 
promises before with regard to not using illegal drugs. I have doubts about his judgment.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
                                            
4 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. In ISCR Case 
No. 14-00775 (App. Bd. July 2, 2015), the Appeal Board sustained the revocation of a security clearance 
for an Applicant, who did not hold a security clearance that used marijuana 20 months before the 
administrative judge decided the case. 
 
9                                         
 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
All of Applicant’s conduct causing a security concern in SOR ¶ 2.a is explicitly 
covered under Guideline H, and that conduct is sufficient to warrant revocation of his 
security clearance under Guideline H. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. Applicant’s 
involvement with illegal drugs affects his professional and community standing. However, 
this conduct does not create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because security officials are aware of it. AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. Guidelines H and 
E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Guideline 
E concerns constitute a duplication of the concerns under Guideline H, and accordingly, 
personal conduct security concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a are found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
 
10                                         
 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines H and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old executive for an entity providing services, and his current 
employer has employed him since 2002. He has held a security clearance for many years. 
He is married and has three adult children and grandchildren. He has excellent 
recommendations and letters of reference.  
 
The evidence against granting Applicant access to classified information is more 
substantial. His illegal drug use was over a 20-year period of time. He would use socially 
with friends, sometimes in his home. He reported different numbers of times that he 
actually smoked marijuana. More importantly, Applicant was not a student. He was a 
mature man. He had a family. He was holding a security clearance. It is troubling that he 
signed two letters of intent and another one at the hearing. He breached a great trust that 
he has with the government. His illegal marijuana possession and use occurred while he 
held a security clearance. His illegal drug possession and use raise unresolved “questions 
about [his] reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to 
physical or psychological impairment and because it raises questions about [his] ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” See AG ¶ 24.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement and 
substance misuse concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With continued abstention from illegal drug 
possession and use, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he 
may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal conduct 
security concerns and drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns are not 
mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
11                                         
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
    Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
