 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------ )  ADP Case No. 17-04127 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position. She did not present sufficient documentary evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from her history of 
financial problems or difficulties. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on March 16, 2017.1 Thereafter, on December 27, 2017, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), which is similar to a 
complaint, detailing a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F for financial 
considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct.  
 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2018. She admitted all the 
allegations under Guideline F, but her answer to the sole allegation (a falsification 
allegation) under Guideline E was largely nonresponsive. She requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 6, 2018, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on March 27, 2018. She did not reply to 
the FORM within the 30-day period provided for under the Directive. The case was 
assigned to me on August 28, 2018.      
  
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel withdrew the falsification allegation under Guideline E for 
the reasons set forth in his Brief.2 Accordingly, it is unnecessary to discuss this matter 
further.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old customer care service advisor for a health-care 
contractor to the Defense Department. She has been so employed since about June 
2017. She is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for her job 
responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because her job involves access to sensitive but 
unclassified information, such as personally identifiable information (PII) or protected 
health information (PHI). This is her first time applying for such eligibility.  
 
Applicant’s educational background includes an associate’s degree in culinary 
arts and an associate’s degree in business management. Both degrees were awarded 
in 2010. She married in 2012, separated in 2013, and divorced in 2017. She has lived 
with a cohabitant since 2017.  
 
Applicant has an uneven history of employment.3 She was unemployed when 
she was a student during 2007-2009. She had a part-time internship with a restaurant 
during 2009-2010. She was then unemployed for about seven months during 2010. She 
had a part-time job as a barista during 2010-2011. She had a part-time job as a 
photographer during 2011-2012. She had a part-time job as an office clerk for several 
months during 2012. She was a stay-at-home mother during 2012-2016. She had a 
part-time job as a sales representative for a furniture store for about four months in 
2016. Her next part-time job was as a line cook at a country club for about three months 
in 2016. She was unemployed from August 2016 until beginning her current job in June 
2017.   
 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel’s Brief at 2.  
 
3 Exhibit 3 (Section 13A – Employment Activities).  
 
 
3 
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of 32 
delinquent accounts ranging in amounts from $60 to $46,053 for a total of about 
$82,000. The delinquent accounts include 24 medical collection accounts, 4 student 
loan accounts, and 4 consumer collection accounts. The largest delinquent account is a 
medical collection account for more than $46,000. The four student loan accounts total 
approximately $23,672. The 32 delinquent accounts are established by (1) Applicant’s 
admissions in her answer to the SOR and (2) a May 2017 credit report.4  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she reached payment 
agreements (at the rate of $10 monthly) with or contacted creditors holding the medical 
collection accounts and the consumer collection accounts. She did not present any 
documentation in support of her claim. She also stated that she entered into a payment 
arrangement with the creditor holding her four delinquent student loan accounts. She 
provided a January 11, 2018 letter from the creditor showing a balance due of $30,560 
for the four loans, and the letter reflects that she has agreed to pay $5 monthly 
beginning January 19, 2018. There is no documentary proof that she has made any of 
the monthly payments mentioned above.  
 
Other than discussed above, Applicant did not submit any supporting 
documentation with her answer to the SOR. Nor did she take advantage of the 
opportunity to reply to the FORM by submitting documentation in extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate, in support of her case. Given these 
circumstances, there is insufficient documentation to establish that the 32 delinquent 
accounts were paid, settled or compromised, in a payment arrangement, disputed, 
cancelled, forgiven, or resolved by some other means.  
 
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
4 Exhibit 5.   
 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .5 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F. There is no 
reliable documentary evidence that Applicant has made forward progress in resolving 
the 32 delinquent accounts that altogether are more than $80,000. The best thing that 
can be said at this point is that she has taken the first step toward resolving her 
delinquent accounts, but she has miles to go. Her problematic financial history suggests 
she may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding 
sensitive information such as PII or PHI.  
 
 With that said, Applicant’s financial problems are probably related to her history 
of unemployment and underemployment, her marital separation and divorce, and the 
need for medical care that resulted in numerous medical collection accounts. 
Nevertheless, what is missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. 
There is no documentation to establish that she initiated and is adhering to a good-faith 
effort to pay the medical collection accounts or the consumer collection accounts. And 
other than the January 11, 2018 letter, there is no documentation to establish that she 
initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to pay the delinquent student loan 
accounts. In short, she has not met her burden of production because she did not 
present sufficient documentation showing that she is making an adequate effort to 
resolve her delinquent debts.  
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Following the clearly-consistent standard, I have doubts and concerns about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did 
not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -- 1.ff:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     Withdrawn   
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Withdrawn  
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility denied.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
