1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03847 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
(Exec. Or.); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 15, 2018, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on March 19, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
2 
 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on March 27, 2018, and he did not object to the 
Government’s evidence, including Item 4,1 submit any additional evidence, or otherwise 
respond. The case was assigned to me on June 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed by this company since at least 2006. He has worked and lived in a foreign 
country during this period. Prior to 2006, he served in the U.S. Army as an enlistee for 
nine years. He has held a secret clearance since about 2006. (FORM Item 4 at 3.) He 
has been married for the last 20 years. He and his wife have one child, who is15 years 
old. Applicant also has a 28-year-old stepchild. 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling about $16,700. Two of these 
debts, representing about $2,300, are owed to two U.S. Government agencies, 
specifically, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS). The third debt is owed to a collection agent seeking repayment of a student loan 
from an educational institution. The evidence concerning the three SOR debts is 
summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: VA debt in collection for $1,123. This debt arose in approximately 
2012 when Applicant ceased taking online classes at an educational institution (the 
Institute). The debt was for “online school fees” that were owed to the VA for “failing to 
complete school requirements.” (FORM Item 3 at 36.) In his August 24, 2016 security 
clearance application (SCA), Applicant stated that he intended to repay this Federal debt 
from future savings. He attached to his response to the SOR, dated February 15, 2018, 
a letter from the VA, dated February 2, 2018, confirming that he had proposed to pay this 
debt with monthly installment payments of $200. The first payment was due on March 1, 
2018. (FORM Item 2 at 3.) The record does not reflect when Applicant received the 
January 3, 2018 SOR. The record also contains no information or documentation 
evidencing that Applicant made any payments to the VA. The most recent credit report in 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 4 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed 
Applicant in her FORM that in his response to the FORM, Applicant could comment upon, make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and updates as necessary, or alternatively that he could object to Item 4 on the ground 
that it was unauthenticated by a Government witness. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I conclude 
that he waived any objections to Item 4. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, 
they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case 
No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application, dated August 24, 
2016 (FORM Item 3), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
the record is dated March 19, 2018, and contains no updated information regarding any 
payments on this six-year-old delinquent debt. (FORM Item 5 at 1.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: Education debt in collection for $14,399. This debt is owed to the 
collection agency for the Institute for courses he took sometime during the period June 
2009 to January 2012. Applicant failed to disclose this debt in his SCA. The debt appears 
in the Government’s November 2016 credit report as a collection matter that was 
assigned to a collection agency in January 2012. (FORM Item 6 at 3.) Applicant has 
provided no information or documentation regarding his payment efforts or plans to repay 
this debt, which has been outstanding for more than six years. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c Federal tax debt for $1,200. In his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he 
did not file a Federal tax return in 2013 or pay any taxes owed. He wrote in his clearance 
application that he was confused whether he had to pay U.S. taxes because his employer 
characterized its employees, presumably those, like Applicant, who lived and worked in 
the same foreign country, as “Tax Exempt.” (FORM Item 3 at 35.) In his SCA, he wrote 
that he planned to pay this debt from future savings. He admitted the debt was still 
outstanding in his response to the SOR, but provided no information regarding his plans 
to repay the debt. (FORM Item 2 at 2.) In his July 27, 2017 Enhanced Subject Interview 
(EHI), he reportedly explained that he was paying income taxes in the foreign country in 
2013 and that he learned he was not required to do so, though he was required to pay 
U.S. taxes. He further stated that he intended to pay his back taxes “as soon as possible.” 
(FORM Item 4 at 4.) Applicant provided no response to the Government’s FORM, so there 
is no record evidence as to whether he paid his 2013 U.S. taxes, which were originally 
due to be paid in April 2014, more than four years ago.3 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
                                                          
3 In his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had not filed his U.S. tax return for 2013. This fact was not alleged 
in the Government’s SOR. 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to 
satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(f) 
(failure to pay annual Federal . . . income tax as required”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authorities to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Although Applicant’s three debts are at least four to 
six years old, the fact that the record evidence reflects that they remain unpaid makes 
them current debts. They were not infrequent and the record contains no information that 
would support a conclusion that additional delinquent debts are unlikely to recur. 
Moreover, Applicant’s ongoing indebtedness to the U.S. Government while he has a 
 
6 
 
pending security clearance application casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. The record contains no evidence to show that 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by conditions beyond his control, with the 
possible exception of his 2013 tax debt. As to that indebtedness, he may have originally 
been misinformed by his employer about his U.S. tax obligations in that year, but he has 
not acted responsibly by failing to resolve this outstanding debt once he learned he was 
obligated to pay U.S. taxes in 2013. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant has received 
any financial counseling from any source, and there is no evidence that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are otherwise under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially established with respect to his indebtedness to the VA, which 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant has produced a letter evidencing a payment 
arrangement he made with the VA, but he produced no evidence to show that he adhered 
to the arrangement by making the monthly payments since March 1, 2018. The fact that 
he entered into the arrangement after submitting his SCA and being questioned about it 
in his EHI, undercuts the good-faith nature of his repayment efforts with respect to this 
debt. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable because Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG 20 (g) is also inapplicable because Applicant has not produced any evidence 
to show that he has made payment arrangements with the IRS to pay his delinquent 2013 
taxes. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed above, but other factors warrant additional comment. I have considered 
Applicant’s age at the time the three debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent. Four 
to six years ago, he was sufficiently old to be expected to honor his financial obligations 
with more maturity. He had served in the U.S. Army for nine years and was well trained 
in the importance of duty to his country and of acting responsibly. The fact that he waited 
until 2018 to contact the VA to propose paying his debt to the Government shows a lack 
of respect for his obligations as a U.S. citizen and as a veteran. His failure to pay his 2013 
taxes once he learned he was obligated to do so similarly undermines his case for 
extenuating circumstances. Applicant did not respond to Department Counsel’s FORM, 
and his failure to provide updated information and documentation reveals a lack of interest 
in responsibly handling his affairs with the U.S. Government. Applicant has not carried 
his burden of persuasion to mitigate the Government’s security concerns. See Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
