 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01811 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under drug involvement and substance 
misuse, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Continued eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under H (drug involvement and 
substance misuse), J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
June 8, 2017.1 
 
                                                     
1 However, I also considered this case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and 
my conclusions are the same using either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for April 10, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
I marked the Government’s discovery letter, its exhibit list, and Applicant’s exhibit 
list as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I, II, and III. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted in evidence without objection. Without 
objection, I sua sponte amended SOR ¶ 1.b, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, to 
replace “2.a” with “1.a.”2 
 
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from Department Counsel (DC), I left 
the record open until April 24, 2018. Applicant timely provided additional documentation, 
which I marked as AE Q and admitted in evidence without objection. I appended to the 
record, collectively as HE IV, Applicant’s list of supplemental exhibits and an email from 
DC indicating she did not have any objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 17, 2018.  
                                                                                                                                                        
Findings of Fact 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. At hearing, he 
denied intentionally falsifying his 2005 security clearance application (SCA) (SOR ¶¶ 3.a 
and 3.b). He is 56 years old. As of the date of the hearing, he had never been married 
and he did not have any children. He lived with his elderly father, for whom he provided 
care.3  
 
 Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in information technology networking in 
2008. He has worked for various defense contractors since 1994. He has worked in 
information technology customer service for his current employer, a defense contractor, 
since 2005. He has held a DOD security clearance since 1996, and he requires a 
clearance for his job.4  
 
 Applicant used marijuana in 1980 and in July 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He 
experimented with it as a teenager when he was in high school. He stopped using it 
around the time he graduated. He then used it again in 2008, when he held a security 
clearance (SOR ¶ 1.b). He was at a friend’s 4th of July house party. He had consumed 
alcohol. An individual at the party offered him marijuana, and he was “[d]umb enough to 
try it.” He acknowledged that he exercised poor judgment in doing so, because he knew 
he held a security clearance and that illegal drug use is prohibited while holding one. He 
testified that “[t]he whole incident and evening is the single worst, dumbest thing I’ve 
ever done in my life. I just regret the whole thing to be honest.” Since the party, he had 
                                                     
2 Tr. at 62-63. 
 
3 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 19-20, 28-30, 57; GE 1, 2; AE G, P. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-21, 30-31, 37; GE 1, 2, 4; AE A, B, C, G. 
 
3 
 
seen the individual who gave him the marijuana, but the individual was not a friend and 
had not again offered him marijuana. He has not used marijuana since 2008. He does 
not intend to use marijuana in the future. His friends and family are aware of his past 
marijuana use.5  
 
 In June 1986, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) (SOR ¶ 2.a). He understood that he received probation before judgment 
(PBJ) and he was not convicted of DUI. He was not court-ordered to fulfill any 
requirements as part of the PBJ.6 
 
 In July 2008, after the party discussed above, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with DUI, possession of a deadly concealed weapon, driving while alcohol 
impaired, possession of marijuana, and possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
He possessed a small amount of marijuana and a pipe, given to him by the individual at 
the party. He testified that he did not know what his intent was in taking the marijuana 
and pipe with him. He might have intended to take the marijuana home and use it on his 
own time. He acknowledged that he exercised poor judgment in doing so.7 
 
 Applicant pled guilty to DUI. The deadly weapon charge, which stemmed from 
the police finding a paper weight in his car under a seat, was dismissed. He testified 
that he could not recall the outcome of the drug-related charges. He listed on his 
February 2016 SCA that he received PBJ for the possession of drug paraphernalia 
charge and probation for the possession of marijuana charge. He was sentenced to 
probation for three years. The first year was supervised and the latter two years were 
unsupervised. He was subjected to and passed several drug tests during his first year of 
probation. He was also ordered to complete an alcohol class. He completed probation in 
2011. He has not had any arrests since.8 
 
 At the time of his arrest, he was unsure whether he was required to report any 
criminal incidents to his facility security officer (FSO) or his employer. As of the date of 
the hearing, he understood that he had to report his 2008 arrest and conviction to his 
FSO. He had not yet done so because he was ashamed and afraid of losing his job. By 
the close of the record, he provided a letter from his FSO who stated that Applicant had 
reported his 2008 DUI. He also provided a letter from his manager who stated that he 
was aware of the allegations in the SOR. His family was aware of his 2008 DUI.9 
 
 Applicant testified that he rarely consumes alcohol. He consumed a beer on 
occasion, and last did so several months before the date of the hearing. He is subject to 
random drug testing at work, and he was subjected to one for the first time in August 
                                                     
5 Tr. at 22-26, 34-44, 49-51, 58-59; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 26-28, 34-38, 42-44; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 26-28, 34-38, 42-44, 53-61; GE 1, 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 26-28, 34-38, 42-44, 53-61; GE 1, 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 26-28, 34-38, 42-44, 53-61; GE 1, 3; AE Q. 
 
4 
 
2017. At his attorney’s suggestion, he voluntarily underwent three drug tests, two in 
October 2017 and one in March 2018. He tested negative for drugs, to include 
cannabinoids. He signed a statement of intent to never use illegal drugs in the future, 
and that any violation may constitute grounds for revocation of his security clearance.10 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his response to Section 23 of his October 
2005 SCA, which inquired whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any 
alcohol or drug-related offenses (SOR ¶ 3.a). He indicated that he did not list his 1986 
DUI because he did not believe the PBJ that he received for the DUI fell within the 
scope of the question. He acknowledged that he answered the question incorrectly. He 
disclosed his 1986 DUI on his 2016 SCA.11 
 
 Applicant also denied intentionally falsifying his response to sections 24a and 
24b of his 2005 SCA (SOR ¶ 3.b). Section 24a inquired whether he had illegally used 
any controlled substance since age 16 or within seven years before the date of the 
SCA, whichever was shorter. Section 24b inquired whether he had ever illegally used a 
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance. He properly answered both 
sections. His high-school use of marijuana did not fall within the scope of section 24a. 
His use of marijuana in 2008, while holding a security clearance, did not occur until 
2008, three years after the SCA. He disclosed his 1980 and 2008 usage of marijuana in 
his 2016 SCA.12  
 
 Applicant has not had any security violations. His character references included 
his manager, a de facto supervisor, coworkers, former coworkers, and friends. A 
number of them, to include his manager, indicated an awareness of the SOR 
allegations. Applicant testified that they were aware of his 2008 arrest and conviction. 
The references described him as having a positive attitude, and attested to his honesty, 
trustworthiness, and reliability.13 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                     
10 Tr. at 21-22, 33, 37-38, 53-54; AE E, F, N. 
 
11 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 28-30; GE 1, 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 28-30, 44-53; GE 1, 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 30-33, 55-61; AE D, H, I, J, K, L, M, O, Q. 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
 
6 
 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in 1980 and 2008. He was arrested and charged with 
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia in 2008, as he possessed marijuana 
and a pipe given to him by the individual at the July 4th party. He held a security 
clearance when he used marijuana in 2008, and he knew that illegal drug use is 
prohibited while holding a clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c) and 25(f) are established. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the drug involvement and substance misuse 
security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana occurred in high school and on one occasion, in 
2008, when he made an extremely poor decision and used marijuana while he held a 
clearance. He disclosed his marijuana use on his 2016 SCA. He was also forthcoming 
about it at the hearing. Though he had seen the individual who provided him with the 
marijuana since the July 4, 2008 party, he did not consider the individual a friend. He 
 
7 
 
has not used any illegal drugs since. He signed a statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse. I find that his behavior happened so long ago 
and was isolated. It does not continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI in 1986, and he received PBJ. He 
was arrested in 2008 and charged with DUI, deadly concealed weapon, driving while 
alcohol impaired, possession of marijuana, and possession of drug paraphernalia. He 
pled guilty to DUI and acknowledged in his 2016 SCA that he received probation for the 
drug charges. AG ¶ 31(b) is established. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct occurred in 1986 and 2008. He completed his 
probation for his 2008 conviction in 2011. He has not had any arrests since. I find that 
so much time has elapsed since his criminal conduct occurred that it does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Since 2005, he has 
established a good employment record with his current defense contractor. AG ¶¶ 32(a) 
and 32(d) apply. 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his response to Section 23 of his 2005 
SCA, by failing to list his 1986 DUI. I found credible his testimony that he did not believe 
the PBJ that he received for this DUI fell within the scope of the question. Applicant 
properly answered both sections 24a and 24b of his 2005 SCA, as his high-school use 
of marijuana did not fall within the scope of section 24a and his 2008 use of marijuana 
did not occur until three years after the SCA. He disclosed his 1986 DUI, as well as his 
1980 and 2008 usage of marijuana, in his 2016 SCA. I find that AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
9 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant credibly testified at the hearing. He has taken responsibility for his past 
drug involvement, to include his one-time use of marijuana in 2008 while holding a 
clearance. He incorrectly failed to disclose his 1986 DUI on his 2005 SCA because he 
believed that he did not need to do so since he received PBJ. He was candid, sincere, 
and remorseful. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns under drug involvement and substance misuse, criminal 
conduct, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:    For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Continued eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
