 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01272 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns that arose out of her infrequent marijuana and prescription drug use from 
January 2005 through August 2014. Applicant has matured and does not intend to use 
any illegal drugs in the future. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2016, Applicant submitted her most recent Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 6, 2017, the Department 
of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H for drug 
involvement and substance misuse. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge in this matter. The case was assigned to me on January 
25, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing on February 5, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 12, 2018. 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2018. The record was left open for the receipt of additional 
evidence until March 26, 2018. Applicant timely submitted AE H and AE I, which were 
admitted without objection. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a government contractor. She is 
unmarried and has no children. From October 2008 to January 2018, she was 
employed by a government contractor. She was granted a security clearance in January 
2009, but did not access classified information until September 2009. She began 
working for a second government contactor in January 2018. (GE 1; AE D; AE G; Tr. 
16-20.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency between 
January 2005 to at least March 2009, to include marijuana use while possessing a 
security clearance. She also purchased and used spice in 2009. Additionally, she 
misused prescription medications in May 2012 and August 2014. Applicant admitted all 
of the SOR allegations, with clarifications. (Answer.)  
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was recreational in nature and occurred six times, over 
a four-year period. She first tried it on New Year’s Day in January 2005. She tried it 
again on a spring break that year. She was in high school at that time. Her next two 
uses occurred at her college dorm in 2006 or 2007. The final two times occurred after 
she graduated from college, at friends’ homes. The marijuana was always provided by 
friends and used socially. She did not purchase it. Applicant also used spice once in 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
early 2009, which was purchased legally from a smoke shop and had not yet become 
illegal. She has not used marijuana or spice since March 2009. (Answer; Tr. 28-34, 43, 
47-49, 66.) 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI). She had a blood alcohol content of .15%. She was found 
guilty of DUI and sentenced to five days in jail, summary probation for five years, and 
fines and fees of $2,015. Additionally, she was required to attend a drug and alcohol 
counseling program for six months. That program made a big impact on her life, and 
she made a conscious decision to change. Her DUI arrest caused her to evaluate her 
past choices. She decided to turn her life around. At that time, she ended a relationship 
with a drug-using boyfriend and no longer associates with drug users. (GE 1; GE 3; GE 
4; Tr. 35-41.) 
 
 Applicant also used prescription drugs not prescribed to her. She used one pill of 
Vicodin in May 2012, administered by her mother. She had a back injury and her mother 
was caring for her. Her mother gave her the Vicodin pill to help her sleep. Applicant 
went to the doctor the next day and obtained prescription medication for her back. (Tr. 
49-53.) Applicant also took one Percocet pill in August 2014, which was offered to her 
by her then boyfriend, because she was suffering from tooth pain over a holiday 
weekend. (Tr. 53-54.) Applicant now understands that she should seek help from urgent 
care should she experience unmanageable pain in the future. She will not use 
prescription drugs that are prescribed to others again. (Tr. 55-56, 67.) 
 
 When Applicant completed her first e-QIP in approximately 2009, she did not 
report her marijuana use. (Tr. 61.) She recognized the “very bad” choice she made in 
omitting that information. On January 4, 2016, Applicant approached her security officer 
and voluntarily reported the alleged drug use, which had previously been unreported. 
(GE 2.) She also fully disclosed her drug use on her 2016 e-QIP. (GE 1.) Applicant 
recognized the poor judgment of her past illegal drug use. She believes she was naïve 
and young when she used marijuana and did not report it. She signed a statement of 
intent demonstrating she would not abuse any drugs in the future. (AE A; Tr. 44-46.) 
She no longer associates with drug users. (Tr. 35, 40, 46.) 
 
 Applicant offered two negative hair follicle drug test results from 2017 and 2018 
into evidence, to substantiate her claim that she no longer uses illegal substances. (AE 
B; AE H.) Applicant is well respected by those who know her, as verified by the seven 
reference letters entered into evidence. She is known as a dedicated employee that is 
respectful of privacy, classified information, rules, and regulations. (AE C.) Her 
performance reviews reflect she is a valued employee. (AE E.) She has been 
recognized with numerous awards by her former employer. (AE F.)  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the drug involvement and substance misuse 
guideline is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions are raised by the evidence: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 2005 to March 2009, and used prescription drugs 
that were not prescribed to her once in 2012 and once in 2014. She has held a security 
clearance since 2000. Therefore, security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a), and 25(f) are 
established.  
 
 Applicant’s one-time use of spice in 2009 does not raise a security concern under 
this guideline, because the evidence did not establish that spice was an illegal drug at 
the time of its use. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate drug-related 
security concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
6 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
While Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned over a nine-year period, Applicant has 
made a number of significant changes in her life during the past two-to-four years that 
demonstrate her serious commitment to abstinence from illegal substances. She 
recognized that she was wrong to use marijuana and medications prescribed to others. 
She voluntarily came forward and confessed her drug use to her facility security officer 
in 2016. She has disassociated herself from drug-using friends and associates. 
Applicant’s drug use occurred largely while she was attending educational institutions. 
She is now in the work-force and no longer attends school. Thus, she has changed her 
environment. While the Directive does not define what constitutes “an appropriate 
period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3), her candor about her illegal drug abuse 
leads me to accept as credible her assertions of no future intent to use marijuana, or 
misuse prescription drugs under any circumstances. Applicant has demonstrated 
sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future. She signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. She has matured and 
understands that any illegal drug involvement is incompatible with her defense 
contractor employment. Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
Government’s concerns under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent but 
illegal drug use occurred over a long span. She was irresponsible at the time and did 
not recognize the seriousness of her actions. She has now matured. She has not used 
illegal substances for more than four years after coming to the revelation that there was 
no room for illegal substances in her future professional life. Those claims were 
substantiated by two negative drug tests. Her changes are permanent and the likelihood 
of recurrence is extremely low. Applicant is respected by those who know her. She has 
a reputation for professionalism and rule following. Applicant’s current reputation for 
trustworthiness, coupled with her recent candor concerning her past drug use, adds 
weight to her commitment to abstain from illegal drug use or misuse of prescription 
drugs. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant should be granted a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
