 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03090 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his continuing family 
and financial connections to Thailand. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, 
national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of Case 
 
On April 8, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations 
processing (e-QIP). On September 29, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 19, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. On January 
18, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete 
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to 
Applicant and received by him February 23, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit any additional 
information or objections to any of the Government’s exhibits. Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. I take administrative notice of the facts concerning Thailand that 
are set forth in the Government’s Request for Administrative Notice, which is marked as 
Item 5 and included in the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated 
into the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He was born in the United States. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) from 1981 to 2001, when he retired with an 
honorable discharge. He has been married four times and has an adult child from one of 
those marriages. After leaving military service, he worked for a period of time for a 
defense contractor and maintained a security clearance. (Item 2)  
 
 Applicant has resided in Thailand since 2004. He opened a bank account in 2005 
that has about $30,000 in it. He married his fourth wife there in 2007. She is a citizen and 
resident of Thailand. He has two teenage stepchildren who are citizens and residents of 
Thailand. In 2009, he purchased a home in Thailand that has a current value of about 
$50,000. The home is recorded in his wife’s name because he is unable to legally own a 
residence there. From 2010 to 2015, Applicant and his wife owned and operated a 
business in Thailand. (Item 2) 
 
  In 2015, Applicant began working in the Middle East for a defense contractor 
supporting U.S. military troops. He maintains his residency in Thailand with his wife and 
stepchildren. He returns to Thailand on leave and lives there when not working out of the 
country. (Items 1, 2) 
    
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and two brothers-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Thailand. Applicant said none of those family members work for the Thai 
government. He needs to maintain a bank account there for living expenses and other 
purposes. (Items 1, 2) 
  
      I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government publications 
concerning Thailand as outlined in Item 5, including the following: Thailand is a 
constitutional monarchy, but since a military coup in 2014 it is being ruled by an interim 
military government. As a consequence of that coup, the United States has reduced its 
security assistance and military engagements with Thailand, although it continues to 
 
 
 
 
3 
maintain economic and diplomatic ties. Thailand’s increasing economic, military, and 
diplomatic ties to China are a concern to the United States. The U.S. State Department 
assessed Thailand as having a moderate risk of terrorism based on recent incidents in 
the country’s southern region. Thailand’s human rights abuses include arbitrary arrests 
and detention; violence and discrimination against women; sex tourism; and limitations of 
worker rights and civil liberties.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s national security 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order adverse to 
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, 
Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; 
 
                                            
1The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
Although the United States and Thailand are allies in several areas, Thailand has 
experienced recent terrorist incidents and the U.S. State Department considers it to pose 
a moderate risk. Additionally, its human rights record causes concern. These facts place 
a burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his residency, significant 
financial interests, and ongoing close relationships with immediate family members and 
in-laws, who are resident citizens of Thailand, do not create a heightened risk of foreign 
influence or pose a security risk. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f) shifting the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant did not clearly demonstrate that it is unlikely that he could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or government 
and those of the United States, as a consequence of his ongoing residency in Thailand 
and long-term relationships with immediate family members who reside there. While he 
honorably served as a U.S. Marine for 20 years, his strong connections to Thailand, 
through his residence and family, may undermine any deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, such that if any conflict of interest arose, 
a question arises as to whether Applicant could be expected to resolve it in favor of U.S. 
interests. The record indicates that Applicant has approximately $80,000 of assets in 
Thailand. There is no evidence that he has financial interests in the United States. 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish persuasive mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), (c), 
or (f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a mature individual who honorably retired from the USMC after serving 
20 years. He held a security clearance during that time and subsequently while working 
for a defense contractor for a couple years. He has been working for another defense 
contractor since 2015. In 2004, he moved to Thailand. Since 2007, he has been living in 
Thailand with his wife and two stepchildren. He has both property and financial interests 
there. His in-laws are citizens and residents of Thailand. He and his wife owned a 
business there for five years. Other than his 20 years of U.S. military service, the record 
contains minimal evidence of Applicant’s current ties to the United States. The absence 
 
 
 
 
7 
of mitigating evidence for the Guideline B allegations compels a finding that he failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for foreign 
influence. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
 
________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
