 
 1
                                                                                                                                                                                 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-02623 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant demonstrated she is able to live within her means, and her 
outstanding delinquent debts do not reflect a security concern. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 6, 2016. 
On August 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
     
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on September 6, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The hearing was held on May 24, 2018. I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, and 
 
 2
Hearing Exhibit (HE)1 I through II, without objection. Applicant also testified. I received 
the completed transcript (TR) on June 5, 2018. I held the record open until June 29, 2018, 
to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. She submitted AE F, without 
objection, which I admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 49 years old and works as a human resource manager for a defense 
contractor. She has worked for her employer since August 2015. She held a DOD public 
trust position when she worked for a defense contractor in Iraq between 2007 and 2011. 
(TR at 9-11) She graduated from college in 2001. Applicant married in 1992, divorced in 
2006, and has three adult children. 
 
Applicant and her abusive ex-husband separated in 2004, and their divorce was 
finalized in 2006.2 (TR at 28-30; GE 3 at 2) At the time of their separation, Applicant owned 
approximately 13 properties, 12 of which were investments. (TR at 29-33) Additionally, 
she was laid off for six months in 2004. (TR at 31) 
 
In 2007, Applicant moved to Iraq for work where she investigated contractors who 
committed crimes while working in country. In late 2010, Applicant was off base doing an 
investigation. The helicopter she was on experienced incoming enemy fire, and she was 
injured in the escape from the aircraft. In early 2011, she returned to the United Sates for 
physical and psychological treatment. Applicant received disability payments from her 
employer in the amount of $2,500 per month from 2011 until 2013. In 2014, she received 
a $100,000 settlement which is to be disbursed over ten years. (TR at 13-14, 46-51) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in approximately 
1995. Her liabilities were about $20,000 and consisted primarily of a vehicle loan and a 
small amount of credit card debt. She filed for bankruptcy because she was overwhelmed 
financially after the birth of her son, and the bankruptcy plan allowed her to consolidate 
and manage her debts. She paid all of her debts through the bankruptcy and the 
bankruptcy was satisfied. (Answer; TR at 21-22, 25-28; AE F) 
  
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b., Applicant denied filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2005. 
She was going through a divorce and was laid off from her job. As a result, she consulted 
with an attorney regarding filing for bankruptcy, but she did not have the money to file. 
After gaining new employment, she decided against filing, and instead sold most of her 
                                                          
1 HE I is the October 25, 2017 discovery letter sent by Department Counsel to Applicant.  
 
2 In 2006, Applicant filed a police report after she learned that approximately $150,000 of accounts were 
fraudulently opened in her name. She believed her ex-husband’s girlfriend opened these accounts. (GE 2 
at 3) 
 
 
 3
investment properties.3 She later learned that the attorney filed without her knowledge, 
and the case was ultimately dismissed.4 (Answer; TR at 29-30; AE F) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. alleges that a mortgage insurance company filed a $21,300 judgment 
against her in 2013. Applicant denied this debt. In August 2007, she purchased a new 
primary residence for herself and her children. She was offered a purchase incentive 
package by the developers. She chose the package that paid for her closing costs and 
down payment, which was worth approximately $20,000. (TR at 33-35) Later in 2007, she 
accepted a job in Iraq, where she lived full-time until her injury in late 2010. While 
Applicant was working in Iraq between 2007 and 2011, her oldest daughter had power of 
attorney (POA) for her. The mortgage payments were made according to the loan 
agreement. 
 
In approximately 2010, Applicant’s primary residence was valued at less than her 
mortgage-loan balance. The bank and Applicant’s realtor suggested Applicant sell her 
home via a short sale. Both the bank and the mortgage insurance company failed to notify 
her that she qualified for a loan modification. At the short sale closing, her daughter was 
required to sign documents obligating Applicant to pay back the incentive money she 
received from the developer. (TR at 33, 36) Applicant’s daughter learned of this 
contingency at the actual closing. (TR at 37-38) 
 
In 2013, Applicant was deposed regarding this debt, and she agreed to make 
payments. At the time, she was unemployed and collecting disability payments related to 
her injuries sustained in Iraq. Despite her offer to make payments, she was not required 
to make payments until her disability status ended. In approximately 2014, Applicant was 
able to go back to work. She subsequently called and spoke to the attorney who 
represented the creditor at the deposition to establish a payment plan. He failed to 
respond to her request to make payments. She was transparent and made good-faith 
efforts to pay and resolve this debt, despite indications that it may not have been 
legitimate. (AE A; TR at 38-44, 52-54) 
 
Applicant was not represented by an attorney at the deposition, nor was her 
daughter represented by an attorney at the short sale closing. (TR at 40) Applicant later 
learned that her lender should have presented her with a loan modification, rather than a 
short sale. (TR at 40-41, 53-57) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. alleges that an account was placed for collection in the amount of $638. 
SOR ¶ 1.f. alleges that another account was placed for collection with the same agency 
in the amount of $100. Applicant denied knowledge of these debts and only became 
aware of them during her security clearance interview. She was willing to pay the debts 
and attempted to find the creditor after her interview, but was unable to find a source to 
pay. (TR at 61-64) 
                                                          
3 Applicant also sold the property related to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g. through 1.l. (Tr. at 30) 
 
4 Applicant learned of the 2005 bankruptcy during her security clearance interview in February 2017. (Tr. 
at 30 and GE 2) 
 
 4
SOR ¶ 1.e. alleges that an account was placed for collection with a different agency 
in the amount of $571. Applicant is a court-appointed special-advocate and works as a 
volunteer guardian ad litem. In this capacity, she purchased season passes for three 
children to attend an amusement park.5 One child was accused of assaulting another 
child, and both children were removed from program. Applicant attempted to return the 
tickets, but the amusement park refused to cancel the memberships. (TR at 64-67; GE 3; 
AE B; AE C) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g. through 1.l. allege that, between 2010 and 2015, six county property 
tax liens were filed against Applicant, totaling $941. These liens are for an investment 
property Applicant sold in approximately 2004. The county in which this property is 
located did not properly record the sale, and the company that purchased the property no 
longer exists. Applicant became aware of these liens during her security clearance 
interview and has been working to resolve this issue with the relevant tax authority. She 
will pay the outstanding tax bill in August 2018, and donate the property. (TR at 20-21, 
33, 68-72; GE 5 through GE 13; AE D; AE F)    
 
Applicant is able to live within her means and maintains a savings account. She 
and her partner earn collectively over $150,000 per year. Their mortgage is $623. 
According to her most recent credit bureau report dated February 18, 2016, she is paying 
her mortgage, car loan, and student loans in a timely and responsible manner. 
Additionally, she owns another property, which has no mortgage. Finally, while she held 
a position of trust, she committed no breaches or violations. (TR at 72, 81; GE 4; AE E) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”6 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”7 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”8 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
                                                          
5 Applicant was supposed to be reimbursed for this cost by the agency she was serving. 
 
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
7 Egan at 527. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
 5
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”11 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.12 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.13 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.14 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”15 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16 
 
                                                          
9 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 6
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.17  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
  
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence establish AG ¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two are 
potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 7
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
While Applicant was serving overseas in Iraq, her mortgage lender took advantage 
of her and her daughter. Applicant was eligible for a mortgage-loan modification, however, 
her mortgage insurer and lender did not disclose this to Applicant but instead positioned 
the property for short sale. At the short-sale closing, Applicant’s daughter was required to 
sign documents that were not provided to her or Applicant in advance. These documents 
obligated Applicant to pay back her original closing costs. A judgment was entered 
against her in 2013 but, due to her disability status, her payments were suspended. When 
her disability ended, she attempted to make payments to the creditor, but the company 
was unresponsive. She made a good-faith effort to resolve her other formerly delinquent 
debts. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated that she is able and willing to live within her means 
and this is reflected in her credit report. I considered that Applicant is not required to be 
debt-free in order to qualify for a security clearance.18 Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
and 20(d) is established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns at issue. 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a security clearance. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
 
 8
Accordingly, Applicant has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security of the United States to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.l.:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
