 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01192 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct and financial considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 27, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2018. On 
March 5, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
                                                     
1 However, I also considered this case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and 
my conclusions are the same using either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
hearing (NOH) scheduling the hearing for March 12, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. 
 
Applicant waived the 15-day hearing notice as required by the Directive.2 I 
marked the Government’s and Applicant’s lists of exhibits as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I 
and II. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through P, which were admitted in evidence without objection.                                                    
  
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from Department Counsel (DC), I left 
the record open until March 26, 2018. Applicant timely provided additional 
documentation, which I marked as AE Q through T and admitted in evidence without 
objection. I appended to the record collectively as HE III, Applicant’s list of supplemental 
exhibits and an email from DC indicating she did not have any objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 22, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in ¶ 1.a and denied the 
remaining SOR allegations in ¶¶ 2.a through 2.j. He is 39 years old. He married in 2000, 
divorced in 2003, and remarried in October 2016. He has three children: an adult child 
from his previous marriage, a minor child from a previous relationship, and a minor child 
from his current marriage.3   
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1998. He attended college in 2004 and 
again since 2014, but he had not yet earned a degree. He served in the U.S. military for 
14 years, from September 1998 until he was honorably discharged in December 2011. 
During this period, he was deployed four times, once to Kuwait and three times to Iraq. 
After his military discharge, he was unemployed until the end of 2012, when he began 
working for his current employer, a defense contractor. In 2015, he was promoted to 
lead network engineer. He was pulled from the lead position when his interim security 
clearance was withdrawn after the issuance of the SOR. He held a DOD security 
clearance from 1998 to 2011.4 
 
 In January 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with misdemeanor simple 
assault, recklessly endangering another person, and endangering welfare of children 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant testified that in September 2010, he spanked his then-girlfriend’s 
four-year-old child on her buttocks because she was misbehaving. He denied striking 
her on the face. His then-girlfriend was not present in the home when the incident 
occurred, but both he and the child notified her about it when she returned. The child 
was not taken to the hospital. Approximately two months later, after he and his then-
girlfriend ended their relationship, she filed charges against him. She claimed that he 
                                                     
2 Tr. at 6; Directive, E3.1.8. 
 
3 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 29, 33-35, 37, 41, 57, 91-92; GE 1, 4, 5; AE I. 
 
4 Tr. at 6-7, 22-33, 35-37, 43, 57-58, 92-94; GE 1, 4, 5; AE J, K, L. 
 
3 
 
had inflicted the “[b]lack eye and a scratch” on her daughter’s face from that day. He 
denied her claim. He indicated that her child was also playing with his rottweiler that 
day, and the rottweiler caused those injuries to the child.5 
 
 Applicant pled guilty to simple assault in June 2013. The remaining charges were 
nolle prossed. On the advice of his attorney, he chose to plead guilty because he was 
prevented from seeing his child while the criminal proceeding against him was pending. 
He was sentenced to probation for five years, ordered to attend anger-management and 
parenting classes, and fined. He was scheduled to complete probation in June 2018. He 
did not have any probation violations. He completed the parenting class in February 
2017. He completed a one-on-one anger-management class at a community college 
over six weekends, at three hours each weekend, in April 2017.6  
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent consumer accounts for 
$7,448 and two delinquent medical accounts for $910 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.j). The debts 
were reported on his October 2015 and October 2016 credit reports. He indicated 
during his 2012 and 2016 background interviews that he was unaware of his delinquent 
debts until the investigators informed him about them.7 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his one-year period of unemployment 
after his military discharge in December 2011. He went from earning $48,000 annually 
to working odd jobs for minimal pay and receiving $700 monthly in unemployment 
benefits. In addition, he incurred $27,000 in legal fees for an attorney to represent him 
in the 2011 criminal proceedings. He paid the fees through a monthly installment plan 
that he completed between 2015 and 2016. In 2012, he was also ordered to pay interim 
child support of $350 monthly for his one child from his previous marriage. That amount 
was later increased to $400 monthly for his two children. Also in 2012, he short sold the 
home that he purchased in 2010. He acknowledged that he also mismanaged his 
finances due to his immaturity.8   
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate his claims that he paid or 
otherwise resolved all of the SOR debts. He paid all but SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, 2.g, and 2.h 
between May and June 2017, after he received the SOR. He believed SOR ¶ 2.c was 
for an insufficient funds fee on a returned check he wrote to a state child support 
agency in 2014. He testified that he was current on his child-support payments of $350 
monthly for his one child from his previous marriage that is still a minor, and that 
monthly payment is automatically withdrawn from his pay. He testified that he believed 
he resolved SOR ¶ 2.d because when he contacted the creditor, he was told that they 
could not locate any account in his name. He also indicated that it was not reported on 
his recent credit reports. The IRS issued a Form 1099-C canceling SOR ¶ 2.g in 
                                                     
5 Tr. at 38, 42-44, 59-72, 84-91; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; AE S. 
 
6 Tr. at 38, 42-44, 59-72, 84-91, 98-99; GE 1, 3, 4, 5; AE A, Q, S. 
 
7 GE 6, 7. 
 
8 Tr. at 35, 40-54, 72-84, 95-96; GE 1, 2, 4, 5.  
 
4 
 
October 2010, before the issuance of the SOR; it was not reported on his 2016 credit 
report. He provided a letter from the creditor for SOR ¶ 2.h indicating that they could not 
locate an account in his name; it was also not reported on his 2016 credit report.9   
 
 Applicant testified that he has matured since the criminal incident and the period 
in which he incurred delinquent debts. In 2010, he received an Article 15 under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice for tardiness due to missing three formations. He also 
received an Article 15 for larceny of government funds after he forged a signature on his 
roommate’s check for $100. He had no other criminal incidents. His wife was aware of 
the 2010 incident and the consequent arrest, charges, and conviction.10 
 
 Applicant’s wife manages their finances. They received financial counseling, and 
the service assisted them with putting together a budget. He checks his credit report 
daily. He earned $58,000 annually as of the date of the hearing. His wife worked as a 
manager. They opened a 401(k) retirement savings plan, and they saved $2,700 as of 
the date of the hearing. They had $300 in a savings account. They were current on their 
expenses, to include the mortgage for their home that they purchased in 2015. Their 
monthly net remainder after expenses was $2,705. Aside from the SOR debts, 
Applicant was disputing a $775 debt with a university, because he believed he was 
charged for a course in which he did not enroll. He was also paying a $675 medical debt 
through a $200 monthly payment plan. He did not have any other delinquent debts.11 
 
 Applicant received numerous decorations, medals, and citations. Included among 
them are the Army Commendation Medal for his deployment to Kuwait. He also 
received three Army Achievement Medals and four Army Good Conduct Medals.  He 
comes from a family who have served in the U.S. military.12 
 
 Applicant’s first witness was a friend of seven years. He worked as a police 
officer for 13 years. He held a security clearance for two years with another government 
agency. Their families socialized once to twice weekly. Though he was unaware of the 
specific SOR allegations prior to the hearing date, he was made aware of Applicant’s 
indebtedness and simple assault charge at the hearing. The witness testified that he 
had never observed Applicant strike any children. He entrusted his two minor children 
with Applicant, and they considered Applicant their uncle. There was nothing about 
Applicant’s spending habits that caused him concern. He testified that Applicant’s past 
issued did not affect his perception of Applicant, as he believed that Applicant made 
mistakes when he was younger and learned from them as he matured. He described 
Applicant as an honest person.13 
                                                     
9 Tr. at 44-54, 72-84, 94-97; GE 4, 5, 6, 7; AE B, C, D, E, F, M, N, R, T. 
 
10 Tr. at 38, 42-44, 59-72, 84-91, 98-99; GE 1, 3, 4, 5; AE A, Q, S. 
 
11 Tr. at 35, 40-43, 53-54, 72-84, 95-97; GE 4, 6, 7; AE G, H, I, O. 
 
12 Tr. at 35-37, 54-58; AE I, J, K. 
 
13 Tr. at 12-22.  
 
5 
 
 The second witness was an owner, vice president, and the assistant facility 
security officer (FSO) of Applicant’s current defense contractor. He was also Applicant’s 
direct supervisor since 2015. He interacted with Applicant between one and five times 
weekly. He held a security clearance for roughly eight years as of the date of the 
hearing. He was generally aware of the SOR concerns, in that he understood Applicant 
had delinquent debts and an incident for which he served probation. He praised 
Applicant’s work performance, and described him as one who “[w]orks very well under 
stress, very well with low direction.” He indicated that Applicant was entrusted with the 
company’s corporate credit card, without incident. He attested to Applicant’s 
trustworthiness. Other character references, to include close friends and coworkers, 
also attested to his trustworthiness, ability to abide by rules and regulations, honesty, 
and reliability.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                     
14 Tr. at 22-33; AE L, P. 
 
6 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and  
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with misdemeanor simple assault, recklessly 
endangering another person, and endangering welfare of children in January 2011. He 
pled guilty to simple assault in June 2013, and he was on probation until June 2018. AG 
¶¶ 31(b) and 31(c) are established for SOR ¶ 1.a.   
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
 
7 
 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 The 2011 incident was an isolated one. It happened under such unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He completed the court-ordered 
parenting and anger-management classes. He had no probation violations. He was 
scheduled to complete probation in June 2018. Since 2012, he has established a good 
employment record with his current defense contractor. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions for SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.j.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
8 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
While conditions beyond his control contributed to his financial problems, 
Applicant acknowledged that he mismanaged his finances due to his immaturity. For the 
full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must also provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He provided corroborating documentation of his 
efforts to pay or otherwise resolve the SOR debts.  SOR ¶ 2.g was canceled by the IRS 
before the issuance of the SOR. He paid all but SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, 2.g, and 2.h between 
May and June 2017. He testified that he was current on his child-support obligation 
underlying SOR ¶ 2.c. The creditor for SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.h could not locate accounts in 
his name, SOR ¶ 2.h is not reported on his 2016 credit report, and Applicant indicated 
that SOR ¶ 2.d is also not reported on his recent credit reports. His ability to resolve his 
debts sooner was hampered by the conditions beyond his control, as previously 
discussed. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. 
 
 Applicant and his wife received financial counseling, through which they compiled 
a budget. His finances are under control. He made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve 
his debts. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur, and they do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did 
mitigated the criminal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
