 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03813 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 3, 2017. 
On December 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E.1 
 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on January 8, 2018. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM and submitted documents in response. 
The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3, 5 and 6), and Applicant’s 
exhibit (AE) marked as AE A, are admitted into evidence. Applicant objected to the 
accuracy of GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview). As GE 4 is a portion of a report of 
investigation (ROI) and has not been authenticated, it will not be admitted into evidence 
or considered in this case.2 The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in 2010. He is unmarried and has one child (seven years 
old). He has never held a DOD security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling over $15,000, including a credit-
card debt, a child-support arrearage, and a small collection account. Additionally, the 
SOR alleges Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to disclose his child support and other 
delinquent debts. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent credit card 
but disputed charges as fraudulent, admitted the child-support arrearage, and denied the 
small collection account. He also admitted that he did not report his child-support 
arrearage by mistake, and denied falsifying the other debts because they were being 
disputed. Applicant did not provide supporting documentation with his answer, but 
included some documentation and a narrative explanation in his response to the FORM. 
All of the SOR allegations are supported by sufficient evidence provided by the 
Government. 
 
Applicant opened a credit-card account in 2011. According to a credit report of 
October 2017, the account became delinquent in February 2015, has a high credit limit 
of $10,125, and has a balance of $10,069. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The account was charged off and 
closed by the creditor in 2015. Applicant noted in his response to the FORM that the credit 
card has a credit limit of $7,500, and he alleges fraudulent charges were placed on the 
card, including out-of-state transactions. He disputed fraudulent charges with a credit 
reporting agency through an online service in early 2018, but did not specify which 
charges were fraudulent. As of March 2018, he had not received a response regarding 
the disputed account. He did not submit a statement or other documentation into evidence 
showing the fraudulent charges or account balance. 
 
                                                     
2 Directive, E3.1.20. 
 
3 
 
Applicant disputed a $574 account originally charged by a pest-management 
company, but now listed by a collection agent (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant noted in his 
response to the FORM that his January 2018 credit report does not show the account, 
and asserted that the debt may be from an apartment dispute that was resolved in his 
favor.  
 
Applicant has a child-support arrearage of $4,760, reported delinquent on a credit 
report in February 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant’s mother passed away in 2013, and he 
became responsible for two home mortgages and caring for his minor teenaged sister. 
Applicant was then unemployed, living with his mother, and has had irregular wages 
through several short-term jobs. He admitted falling behind on his child-support 
payments, but made partial payments whenever possible. He was unsuccessful in 
obtaining a reduced child-support payment, and he incurred arrearages despite paying 
child support since 2013. Applicant found a full-time job in November 2017 with a salary 
of $95,000. As a result, he stated that he resumed regular child-support payments, and 
tries to make additional payments toward the arrearage when he can. He provided 
evidence of child-support payments from November 2014 to February 2018. His most 
recent statement shows that he has not been able to meet his required payments in full, 
and continues to owe a balance of $4,750. He notes that his credit score has improved 
since March 2017. 
 
Applicant stated that he completed his SCA in October 2016, but his employer did 
not submit it as required, so he was asked to complete another SCA during an overnight 
shift in April 2017. Of note, the SCA submitted by the Government was signed and dated 
January 3, 2017. (GE 3) In response to questions regarding financial delinquencies, 
including child support and delinquent debts, Applicant answered “no.” In his response to 
the FORM, Applicant noted that he did not have a clear understanding of what was being 
requested, and his failure to note his financial delinquencies was an oversight. He noted 
in his answer to the SOR, that he was making payments on his child-support obligation, 
and that he was disputing the charges on the credit card. 
 
 Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations, or evaluate his demeanor 
or credibility in response to questions about the status of his debts and current finances. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence supporting the SOR 
allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
6 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts have been a recurring problem that have not been 
fully addressed. Although Applicant has suffered financial hardships resulting from his 
mother’s death, responsibility for his sister, and an inconsistent employment history, he 
has not provided sufficient evidence for me to determine that he has addressed his 
delinquent debts and child-support arrearages in good faith, and that continued 
indebtedness is unlikely to recur. Applicant recently disputed debts that were charged off 
years ago, but did not specify what charges were fraudulent and what charges belonged 
to him. He defaulted on his credit card a number of years ago, but claimed a dispute after 
receiving the SOR. He has not shown a reasonable basis to dispute the credit card and 
collection debt, has not received a resolution of the disputes, and has not offered evidence 
of a contemporaneous report of a theft of his credit card or personal identity. Applicant 
has not shown sufficient evidence of the legitimacy of his disputed debts. In addition, he 
has held a job paying $95,000 since November 1, 2017, but continued to make incomplete 
child-support payments and has shown insufficient evidence of a plan to repay the 
arrearage. 
 
Applicant’s long-standing disregard for his debts and child-support obligations 
raises questions about his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
He presented no evidence showing his current financial condition or that he sought 
financial counseling or other assistance to address his debts. He has not shown that his 
financial situation is under control, or that he has a reasonable basis to dispute his 
delinquent debts. No mitigating condition is fully applicable. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
7 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as here, the Government has the 
burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.3 An applicant’s level 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.4 
 
  Applicant failed to report his delinquent debts and child-support arrearage on his 
SCA, as required. Based on the evidence in the record, I find that he knowingly failed to 
report his debts despite his claim of not fully understanding the questions on the SCA and 
having to complete the form twice. There is sufficient evidence that Applicant knew of the 
delinquent credit card and child-support arrearage, and that he knowingly omitted them 
from his SCA. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Applicant’s omissions were recent and I have insufficient evidence that it is unlikely 
to recur, given his claim to have completed two SCAs within a few months of each other. 
At the time, he knew of the delinquent accounts, and his later dispute of the debts and 
payments of child-support, do not absolve him of the requirement to truthfully report the 
debts.  No mitigating condition fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
                                                     
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s 
delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. He has not shown evidence of whole-person 
factors sufficient to overcome the debts and his failure to report them. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2. Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
