1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 17-03663 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant used marijuana approximately once every three weeks with friends from 
2008 to 2014. He was cited for possession of drug paraphernalia in January 2016 and for 
possession of marijuana in August 2016, but claims neither the paraphernalia nor the 
marijuana belonged to him. In February 2017, he was arrested for evading responsibility in 
an accident causing damage. Applicant has yet to show adequate reform. Clearance is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline J, 
criminal conduct. The SOR explained why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF 
took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
08/29/2018
2 
 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, 
to all adjudications for national security eligibility or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. 
 
On January 19, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On February 20, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On February 27, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for March 
22, 2018. With the agreement of the parties, I rescheduled the hearing for March 20, 2018. 
 
I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and 
two Applicant exhibits (AEs A-B) were admitted into evidence without objection. A February 
14, 2018 letter forwarding discovery of the then proposed GEs to Applicant, a March 9, 
2018 email to Applicant, and a list of the GEs were incorporated in the record as hearing 
exhibits I, II, and III respectively, but not admitted as evidence. Applicant and three 
witnesses testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on March 28, 2018. 
 
I held the record open initially for three weeks for post-hearing submissions from 
Applicant. On April 2, 2018, Applicant submitted letters from an Employee Assistance 
Program (EAP) counselor (AE C) and from the coordinator for an anger management 
program (AE D), which were received in evidence without any objections. On April 6, 2018, 
Applicant submitted a revised letter from the EAP counselor (AE E), which was admitted in 
evidence. 
 
On July 11, 2018, Applicant submitted an email indicating that he had just had a 
court date and that “everything is good.” I informed Applicant that, in light of his 
correspondence regarding the incident alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, I would consider reopening 
the record for any court record or other document showing the current status of the case. 
Applicant responded that he had no further documents to submit. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H and cross-alleges under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 
2.a) that Applicant used marijuana from approximately 2008 through 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a), 
and that he was arrested and charged with possession of drug paraphernalia in January 
2016 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and possession of marijuana in August 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant was 
also alleged under Guideline J to have been arrested and charged with evading 
responsibility with damage or injury in March 2017 (SOR ¶ 2.b). When Applicant answered 
the SOR, he admitted that he had used marijuana as a teenager “at a few parties from 
peer pressure.” He denied that he was arrested in 2016, and explained that he was issued 
citations in each instance. He pleaded not guilty because the drug paraphernalia and 
marijuana did not belong to him. He admitted that he had been arrested and charged with 
evading responsibility in March 2017 “because of a hostile girlfriend and [him] trying to 
leave the situation before things escalated.” He indicated that he had paid restitution and 
was in counseling. (Answer.) 
 
3 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 22-year-old high school graduate with technical school training in auto 
body work, collision, and repair obtained from August 2013 to December 2015. He has yet 
to earn a certificate or degree. He needs to complete one credit to raise his grade point 
average to the 2.0 needed to graduate. (Tr. 49.) He is unmarried but has a two-year-old 
daughter, for whom he pays child support of $119 a week. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 23.) He has never 
held a security clearance. He has been offered employment by a defense contractor that is 
contingent on him being granted a security clearance. (Tr. 51.) 
 
While attending technical school, Applicant worked part time in retail and then for a 
movie theater. He worked at a restaurant from July 2015 until January 2016, when he 
resigned for a full-time auto body technician position. He left that job in June 2016 because 
he did not think he was treated fairly, and he returned to work for the restaurant. (GE 1.) 
 
As part of his application to work for a defense contractor, Applicant completed and 
certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on July 
8, 2016. He disclosed that he had been arrested in January 2016 for having drug 
paraphernalia in his vehicle, but that the charge was dismissed in April 2016. He listed no 
other arrests and responded negatively to the illegal drug inquiries including the following: 
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you been involved in the illegal purchase, 
manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, 
handling or sale of any drug or controlled substance? (GE 1.) 
 
 On July 13, 2017, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). About his January 2016 arrest, Applicant stated 
that he was in route home from work when he was stopped for a headlight violation. The 
officer conducted a search of his vehicle and found a marijuana grinder and bowl. 
Applicant denied that the paraphernalia belonged to him, but the police issued him a 
citation for $100 with an option to appear in court.1 In February 2016, Applicant was 
advised that the charge would be dropped if he completed 20 hours of community service, 
which he finished in April 2016. He expressed his belief that the charge was dismissed 
                                                 
1 Under Section 21a-267(d) of his state’s general laws, use or possession of less than a half-ounce of 
marijuana is an infraction: 
 
(d) No person shall (1) use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, 
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, 
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain or conceal, or to ingest, inhale or 
otherwise introduce into the human body, less than one-half ounce of a cannabis-type 
substance, or (2) deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver 
drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, 
that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, 
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain or conceal, or 
to ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body, less than one-half ounce of a 
cannabis-type substance. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall have 
committed an infraction. 
4 
 
when he provided proof to the court of the community service. He stated that the 
paraphernalia had been left in his vehicle by a friend. Applicant then disclosed that he was 
ticketed in August 2016 for possession of marijuana and a seatbelt violation. He explained 
that he was stopped in route home from work, and the police found a small bag of 
marijuana in his vehicle. Applicant believed that a friend left the drug in his car, and he told 
the officer that the drug did not belong to him. He was issued a citation with a $175 fine for 
marijuana possession and $65 for seatbelt violation. He requested a court appearance, 
and indicates that, in October 2016, he was told that the charge would be dropped on 
payment of a $100 “charitable contribution.” He expressed his belief that the charges were 
dropped after he paid the $100.2 (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant then revealed that, in February 2017, he was arrested for misdemeanor 
evading responsibility.3 He was leaving a friend’s home when his girlfriend pulled up beside 
him in her vehicle. He had called her names on the telephone earlier, and she challenged 
him to a fight. Applicant refused to exit his vehicle and, while leaving, he “accidently swiped 
the side of [his girlfriend’s] car.” He did not stop, and later that evening, the police arrested 
him for evading responsibility. At a court appearance on July 11, 2017, Applicant was 
advised that a nolle prosequi would be entered in a year if he completed an anger 
management class.4 Applicant admitted that he had yet to look into acceptable anger 
management classes, but he expressed his intention to attend the classes within the year. 
He denied any intention to engage in criminal behavior in the future because he wanted to 
get a good job and be a good role model for his daughter. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant also acknowledged to the OPM investigator that he should have answered 
“yes” on his SF 86 to the inquiry concerning any illegal drug use in the last seven years. He 
then detailed that he used marijuana from 2008 to 2014 about once every three weeks with 
his then friends. He took a few puffs off joints passed to him and did not purchase the drug. 
Applicant used the marijuana to fit in with his friends. He never purchased the drug himself. 
Applicant denied that his marijuana use ever caused him a problem because the 2016 
citations occurred after he had ceased using marijuana. Applicant added that after he was 
cited for marijuana possession in August 2016, he stopped associating with the friends 
involved in his drug use. Applicant stated that he had no intention of using marijuana in the 
future. He explained that he failed to report his marijuana use on his SF 86 because he did 
not think that marijuana was still illegal.5 (GE 2.) 
                                                 
2 No citations or court records for either incidents were made available for my review. 
 
3 The March 2017 date alleged in the SOR was the date of his first court appearance. 
  
4 A nolle prosequi or nolle is a formal entry on the record by a prosecutor by which he or she declares that 
there will be no further prosecution. 
 
5 Effective July 1, 2011, the state changed the penalty for possessing less than one-half ounce of marijuana 
from a potential term of imprisonment and large fine to a fine for a first and subsequent offense. See § 21a-
279a, which provides the penalty for illegal possession of small amounts of a cannabis-type substance: 
 
(a) Any person who possesses or has under his control less than one-half ounce of a 
cannabis-type substance, as defined in section 21a-240, except as authorized in this chapter, 
5 
 
 Available information about the February 2017 evading responsibility charge 
indicates that Applicant was granted accelerated rehabilitation in June 2017 with an 
evaluation for anger management and substance abuse. He had “just made” an 
appointment for his accelerated rehabilitation program and was planning to make an 
appointment for his anger management and substance abuse counseling as of September 
11, 2017. (GE 3.) 
 
 DOHA gave Applicant an opportunity to review and make any corrections to the 
OPM investigator’s summary report of his July 13, 2017 interview. On November 8, 2017, 
Applicant adopted the investigator’s report as accurate with one addition. He indicated that 
he had started his anger management classes and counseling “in the past months.” (GE 2. 
 
 Applicant attended substance abuse counseling through the defense contractor’s 
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) on September 14, 2017, September 22, 2017, 
October 5, 2017, and March 29, 2017. His next session was scheduled for April 12, 2018. 
(AE E.) He had no explanation for why the judge ordered him to complete substance abuse 
counseling, but he suspected it was for alcohol. He testified that he was in a “downward 
spiral with [his] relationship, so [he] would just drink.” (Tr. 78.) He also participated in group 
sessions of a men’s anger management program focusing on defining and understanding 
domestic violence and abusive versus respectful communication. He started on September 
30, 2017, three weeks into a nine-week program, and attended five sessions before it 
ended on November 11, 2017. (AE D; Tr. 82.) While the EAP counselor and the program 
coordinator for the anger management program confirmed his attendance, neither provider 
commented about his progress. 
 
 Applicant continues to deny that the drug paraphernalia and marijuana found in his 
vehicle in January 2016 and August 2016 belonged to him. He was not arrested but rather 
was ticketed. He paid his fine and completed his community service. He testified that he 
completed the anger management program required for evading responsibility, even 
though he attended only five of the nine sessions. He testified that there was no required 
number of substance abuse counseling sessions, but that he had attended six sessions. 
(Tr. 45-47.) When asked about a previous admission during his OPM interview that he had 
used marijuana from 2008 to 2014 about every three weeks, Applicant indicated that he 
“just gave an average time” for the dates. He expressed disbelief that he had told the 
investigator he used marijuana about every three weeks, and that there must have been 
some miscommunication. When asked for his present recollection about the frequency of 
                                                                                                                                                             
shall (1) for a first offense, be fined one hundred fifty dollars, and (2) for a subsequent 
offense, be fined not less than two hundred dollars or more than five hundred dollars. 
 
(b) The law enforcement officer issuing a complaint for a violation of subsection (a) of this 
section shall seize the cannabis-type substance and cause such substance to be destroyed 
as contraband in accordance with law. 
 
(c) Any person who, at separate times, has twice entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or 
been found guilty after trial of, a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon a 
subsequent plea of nolo contendere to, or finding of guilty of, a violation of said subsection, 
be referred for participation in a drug education program at such person's own expense. 
6 
 
his marijuana use, Applicant responded, “I’ve tried it. I went to a few parties, tried it, and 
that was it.” When asked for the number of times that he had used it, Applicant stated that 
he used it twice between 2008 and 2014 at a party. (Tr. 51-54.) About the glaring 
discrepancy between his present account of two-time marijuana use and the adopted 
report of interview (GE 2) containing his admission to using marijuana once every three 
weeks, Applicant again asserted that it was a miscommunication between him and the 
investigator. (Tr. 55.) Applicant stated that he last associated with persons that use 
marijuana “about a year ago.” He denied any intention of using marijuana in the future. 
Applicant apparently passed a drug screen by hair analysis in 2017 for the job offer with 
the defense contractor. (Tr. 56-58.) 
 
 About his possession of drug paraphernalia in January 2016, Applicant testified that 
the police officer found the drug paraphernalia in the right cup holder between the driver’s 
and passenger’s seats. Despite its obvious location, Applicant asserts he did not notice it in 
his vehicle. Applicant’s explanation was that it must have been placed there by a friend 
who had been in his car previously. He testified that he made no inquiries of his friends to 
determine to whom it may have belonged because he did not want to argue “over a group 
of friends.” He also stated that only two people could have left the paraphernalia in his 
vehicle, and he told neither of them about it. Applicant indicated that the friends had been 
in his vehicle probably a week before the incident. (Tr. 59-64.) 
 
 Regarding the August 2016 citation for possession of marijuana, Applicant could not 
explain what prompted the officer to search his vehicle. When asked whether the officer 
smelled marijuana or suspected that he was using it, Applicant answered, “Not to my 
knowledge, no. They didn’t say that.”  About where the officer found the marijuana, he 
responded, “I believe it was on me, in my pocket.” He saw the marijuana on his passenger 
seat, and when he got pulled over, he just put it in his pocket. He recalled that he had his 
friends in his car the day before he was pulled over by the police. He again did not confront 
those friends about the marijuana because he is “not a confrontational person.” (Tr. 65-71.) 
As to why he continued to associate with known marijuana users after his daughter was 
born and after he completed his SF 86, Applicant indicated that it took him some time to 
realize that his friends were not there for him as he was for them. He would have done 
anything for his friends, no matter what. (Tr. 72-73.) 
 
 Concerning his arrest for evading responsibility, Applicant admits that he had 
tweeted things he should not have said to his girlfriend. He called her names and hit her 
car, but she did try to cause a fight. He denies that he caused any damage to her vehicle. 
(Tr. 74-76.)  
 
 Applicant had been employed as a painter for about a month as of his hearing. He 
enjoys the work, but it is “iffy” with the hours. (Tr. 50-51.) He is struggling to pay his bills. 
(Tr. 84.) He expressed regret for everything that he had done in the past. (Tr. 84.) 
7 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend testified that he has become more responsible over the three 
years of their relationship. She has seen “a lot of improvement in his behavior” over the 
past year. Over time, he changed his friends and become “a way better father.” She has 
custody of their daughter, but Applicant keeps their daughter overnight for her so that she 
can work. She told Applicant that she would not allow their daughter to be around his 
friends who were a negative influence on him. She and Applicant are currently working on 
their relationship and spend weekends together. Regarding the 2017 incident, they were 
not seeing each other at that time (had broken off their relationship) and were being “very, 
very mean to each other.” She was angry after arguing with him earlier in the day, and she 
blocked his car. He tried to avoid the situation and hit her vehicle. Because he left the 
scene, she called the police. (Tr. 20-26.) 
 
 Applicant’s father has almost 30 years of employment with a clearance with the 
defense contractor that is sponsoring Applicant’s application for a security clearance. 
Applicant’s father testified that there were some trying times when Applicant’s girlfriend 
was pregnant in that Applicant was “kind of flop-flopping around.” (Tr. 30.) Applicant has 
become more responsible. Regarding his son’s arrest for evading responsibility, Applicant’s 
father testified that it was wrong for Applicant to leave the scene, but he understands that 
Applicant was trying to get away for his safety. He described Applicant as more of a 
follower than a leader. (Tr. 28-35.) 
 
 Applicant’s aunt, who has been a nurse in the mental health and substance abuse 
field for ten years, attested to Applicant’s desire to work for the defense contractor. She is 
aware that, “a few years back [Applicant] was hanging around with the wrong kids trying to 
find his way in life.” She was surprised to learn that Applicant “tried marijuana, got ticketed, 
and his girlfriend had him arrested for hitting her car when she completely blocked him in.” 
However, Applicant realized that he had much to lose if he continued down that path, and 
he changed his friends. She has noticed a maturity in Applicant since the incident involving 
his girlfriend and does not consider him to be a threat to national security. (AE A.) 
 
 The mother of Applicant’s girlfriend testified that Applicant had her daughter did not 
have a good relationship in the beginning, but that Applicant has come to be “a great dad 
and a good boyfriend.” She blames her daughter for the 2017 incident that led to 
Applicant’s arrest. Regarding Applicant’s drug charges, she had heard there was one 
arrest, but she found it hard to believe of him. She never saw Applicant using illegal drugs, 
but when she first met him, he associated with “known potheads.”  She has not seen any of 
those individuals in over a year. (Tr. 38-41.) 
 
 The grandmother of Applicant’s girlfriend has known Applicant for the past three 
years and sees him when he visits his daughter and girlfriend, who live on the floor above 
her. (AE B; Tr. 41.) Applicant immediately took parental responsibility without any 
resentment and has been “an excellent and loving father.” To her knowledge, Applicant has 
a good work ethic. She has not seen him smoke marijuana and asks that he be given the 
chance to move forward by obtaining the job with a defense contractor, which would 
8 
 
eventually provide him the income needed to marry his girlfriend and support a family. (AE 
B.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are set forth in 
AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
Although Applicant now claims that he used marijuana only two times, he told an 
OPM investigator that he used marijuana every three weeks with friends from 2008 to 
2014. He had an opportunity to correct the report of interview containing that account of his 
drug use, and he adopted the summary as accurate with an update that he was going to 
counseling. Applicant now asserts that there must have been a miscommunication 
between him and the interviewer, but he did not elaborate about what he could have said 
that would explain such a significant discrepancy. Both Applicant’s girlfriend and her 
mother testified that Applicant’s friends at the time were involved with marijuana. His 
girlfriend’s mother described the friends as “known potheads.’ Applicant’s account of 
having used marijuana approximately three times a week with his friends to fit in is more 
credible than that he used marijuana only twice. AG ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse,” 
applies. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever purchased any marijuana. However, he 
had physical possession of marijuana when he took puffs from joints passed to him by his 
friends. Moreover, he had drug paraphernalia in his vehicle when he was stopped for a 
headlight violation in January 2016, and he had a bag of marijuana in his possession when 
he was pulled over for a seatbelt violation in August 2016. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession 
of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is also established.  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) provides for mitigation when the drug involvement and substance misuse 
“happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant denies any marijuana use since 2014. There 
are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is recent for purposes of mitigation. 
The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
10 
 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”6  It is difficult to believe that neither the drug paraphernalia that was in the 
cup holder in January 2016 nor the marijuana that was on the passenger seat of his vehicle 
in August 2016 belonged to him. Even assuming that Applicant last used marijuana in 
2014, it cannot be viewed in isolation from the more recent drug paraphernalia and 
marijuana possession infractions. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) provides for mitigation when an individual acknowledges his or her drug 
involvement and has no intention of future drug activity: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) has some applicability in that he stopped associating with his drug-using 
friends in approximately March 2017, and he intends no future illegal drug involvement. His 
girlfriend and her mother testified that he has become a more responsible parent to his 
daughter over the last year. That behavior is consistent with a drug-free lifestyle. Yet, AG ¶ 
26(b) requires a truthful acknowledgement of drug involvement. Applicant showed little 
reform in that regard by now maintaining that he used marijuana only twice between 2008 
and 2014. His recantation of his previous admission to having used marijuana three times 
a month raises doubt about whether he has been fully forthright with the Government about 
his marijuana use, especially where he had marijuana in his possession in August 2016. 
His serious minimization of his marijuana use at his hearing also makes it difficult to accept 
his denials that the marijuana and drug paraphernalia in his vehicle in 2016 did not belong 
to him. Under the circumstances, he has not established a sufficient pattern of abstinence 
to safely conclude that his drug involvement is not likely to recur. 
 
 Although Applicant has had some court-ordered substance abuse counseling, he 
testified that it was for alcohol. He did not present evidence of a favorable prognosis that is 
required under AG ¶ 26(d), which provides: 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including, 
but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
                                                 
6 See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
11 
 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about criminal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Under state law, Applicant’s possession of drug paraphernalia in January 2016 and 
possession of marijuana in August 2016 are infractions. Use of a small quantity of 
marijuana is punishable only by a fine. While the state may have decriminalized the use 
and possession of less than a half-ounce, it is still against the law. Furthermore, marijuana 
is a Schedule I controlled drug under federal law pursuant to Title 21, Section 812(c) of the 
United States Code, and use of marijuana is illegal. The evidence shows that Applicant 
was granted accelerated rehabilitation in June or July 2017 for misdemeanor evading 
responsibility. He left the scene after he struck his girlfriend’s vehicle in February 2017. 
Two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 apply because of his illegal drug involvement 
and misdemeanor evading responsibility: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely 
to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast 
doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, 
and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The aforesaid illegal conduct is too recent for mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a), which 
provides:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(d) warrants some consideration because Applicant attended five sessions 
of a men’s anger management group and had EAP substance abuse counseling required 
of his accelerated rehabilitation for the 2017 evading responsibility offense. AG ¶ 32(d) 
provides: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
12 
 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant did not avail himself of the opportunity to provide court documents 
showing that he had fully satisfied the conditions of his accelerated rehabilitation. The 
program coordinator for the anger management program indicates that Applicant attended 
five sessions of a nine-session program. The EAP counselor provided an update on April 
5, 2018, which shows that Applicant returned to counseling in late March 2018 after no 
sessions since October 5, 2017. There is no clear indication that his participation in the 
anger management program and EAP counseling fully satisfied the requirement of his 
accelerated rehabilitation. If he sufficiently satisfied the requirements for the charge to be 
dismissed in July 2018, it would not fully mitigate the security concerns raised by relatively 
recent criminal behavior. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).7 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), 
Applicant was only 20 years old when his daughter was born. Youth and immaturity were 
certainly factors in his continued association with his marijuana-using friends after her birth 
and in Applicant’s illegal possession of drug paraphernalia and marijuana in 2016. He 
possessed marijuana as recently as August 2016, after he completed his SF 86. 
 
The persons who know Applicant best attested credibly that he has become a good 
father to his daughter over the past year. However, Applicant has not fully persuaded me 
that he can be counted on to exercise sound judgment required of a security clearance 
holder. He has shown himself willing to misrepresent his drug involvement to obtain the 
clearance needed for employment to support his daughter. It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). The Government must be able to rely on those 
persons granted security clearance eligibility to fulfill their responsibilities consistent with 
laws, regulations, and policies, and without regard to their personal interests. For the 
reasons discussed, Applicant has raised enough doubt in that regard to where I am unable 
to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
                                                 
7 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
13 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
