 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02667 
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq.   
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. An Iraqi citizen by birth and a U.S. citizen since 2015, 
Applicant did not meet his burden to present evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns under the foreign influence and personal conduct security 
guidelines. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 11, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on September 14, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline B for foreign influence and 
Guideline E for personal conduct. The former concerned Applicant’s connections to Iraq 
via his family ties. The latter concerned an allegation that he, while working as an 
linguist for the U.S. armed forces in Iraq, deliberately concealed his knowledge of 
people participating in insurgent activities against the U.S. armed forces.  
 
With assistance of counsel, Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2017. He 
admitted without explanation the foreign influence allegations; denied without 
explanation the personal conduct allegation; and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.   
 
The case was assigned to me on November 27, 2017. Applicant’s security 
clearance was suspended in late December 2017 or early January 2018, and he has 
since been on an unpaid leave of absence.2 The hearing took place as scheduled on 
March 20, 2018. Both Department Counsel and Applicant offered documentary exhibits, 
which were admitted as Government Exhibits 1-6 and Applicant’s Exhibits A-K and N; 
Exhibits L and M were not admitted. The hearing transcript was received on March 29, 
2018.   
 
At the close of evidence, I directed counsel to submit proposed findings of fact 
concerning the SOR allegation under Guideline E, with an April 19, 2018 deadline.3 
Both counsel made timely submissions; Department Counsel’s proposed findings of fact 
are made part of the record as Appellate Exhibit I, and Applicant’s proposed findings of 
fact are made part of the record as Appellate Exhibit II.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, a native of Iraq, is a 37-year-old employee who requires a security 
clearance for his job as a linguist in support of the U.S. armed forces. His formal 
education includes a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering awarded in 2003 by 
an Iraqi university. He was granted permission to immigrate to the United States under 
a program called Special Immigrant Visas for Iraqi and Afghan translators/interpreters, 
which is administered by the U.S. Department of State. He arrived here in January 
2014, and he obtained U.S citizenship in 2015. He married a native of Iraq in 2008. 
They have two children, both of whom attend public elementary school. His wife is a 
U.S. permanent resident, and his two children are U.S. citizens. 
 
Like nearly all first-generation immigrants, Applicant has several family members 
who are citizens of and residents in his country of birth. In particular, his father, mother, 
one brother, two sisters, parents-in-law, and multiple sisters-in-law are in Iraq. Applicant 
has a younger brother who also served as a linguist in Iraq and who has immigrated to 
                                                          
2 Tr. 57-59.  
 
3 Tr. 124-126.  
 
 
3 
 
the United States. The younger brother was called as a witness (telephonically) during 
the hearing and provided detailed information about their family members in Iraq, and 
he also provided information about Applicant. The brother also served in the U.S. Army 
as a linguist and deployed to Iraq in support of a Special Forces unit. The brother was 
medically retired from the Army in 2017; he currently works as a research analyst for a 
defense contractor and holds a high level security clearance; and he is currently going 
through the hiring process with a federal law enforcement agency. The family members 
in Iraq fled Baghdad in 2006, after receiving threatening calls based on Applicant’s and 
his younger brother’s work as linguists on behalf of the U.S. armed forces.4 The family 
has since lived in the northern part of Iraq. The brother described his family as an 
educated, open-mind family, and he described Applicant as an honest, quiet person 
focused on family, self-employment, learning, and education.  
 
Applicant’s employment history goes back to shortly after he was awarded his 
university degree in 2003, and it includes working in both Iraq and the United States. 
Beginning in late 2003 or early 2004, he worked as a translator for a company that was 
a subcontractor to a U.S. company. His job ended in 2005 when the subcontractor 
ceased working for the prime contractor due to the unstable security situation in Iraq. A 
few months later in December 2005, he began working as a local-hired linguist in 
support of the U.S. armed forces.5 He had that job, with two different companies, until 
July 2008 when the team he was working with completed its tour and returned to the 
United States. He began another job as a local-hired linguist in support of the U.S. 
armed forces a few months later in August 2008. He had that job until October 2009, 
when the contract concluded. That ended his employment as a linguist for the next 
several years.  
 
Still living in Iraq, Applicant worked part-time as a service advisor for an 
automobile dealership from November 2009 to the end of 2013. He also worked part-
time as a maintenance supervisor for a municipality during 2010-2013.  
 
Applicant was initially unemployed for several months after his arrival in the 
United States in January 2014. He enlisted as a solider in the U.S. Army Reserve, and 
he was on active duty for training in the field of logistics from September 2014 through 
February 2015, when he was honorably discharged.6 He then worked as a sales 
associate for a large retail store beginning in about July 2015 and continuing until about 
February 2016. He then obtained a job with a federal contractor working at the U.S. 
Embassy in Iraq.  
 
After about a year, he accepted a job with another federal contractor, Applicant’s 
current employer. This job was a sensitive position requiring a higher level of clearance, 
which required him to take a counterintelligence polygraph examination.7 The 
                                                          
4 Tr. 26, 31-32.  
 
5 Tr. 52; Exhibits 1 and N.  
 
6 Exhibit B.  
 
7 Tr. 76.  
 
4 
 
examination occurred over three days in May and June 2017. After the third session, 
the examiner issued a June 15, 2017 report, which was admitted as Exhibit 2. In the 
report the term Examinee refers to Applicant. Because the report is a central item of 
evidence, it is quoted in relevant part below:  
 
Since 2004, EXAMINEE admitted to deliberately concealing the fact that 
HE knew several individuals affiliated with anti-US insurgent activities in 
Iraq. Beginning in 2004, EXAMINEE has worked for the US Forces as a 
local national, first as a Category I linguist then later as a Category II 
linguist. EXAMINEE stated HE is presently a member of the US Army 
Reserve. EXAMINEE noted HE had undergone the required security 
interviews and counterintelligence screening process through the years in 
order to become a linguist; obtain HIS US citizenship; and enlisted in the 
US Army Reserve. However, EXAMINEE claimed HE deliberately withheld 
HIS personal knowledge of the insurgent activities and individuals 
because if this information became known it would make HIM “look bad.” 
HE thought it would also “negatively impact” HIS ability to become a US 
citizen and obtain a security clearance. In late 2004, HE discovered one of 
his friends was an Improvised Explosive Devise (IED) maker in Baghdad, 
Iraq. The individual’s first name was Wameed and his last name was 
either [omitted] both phonetic. Wameed’s father first name was [omitted]. 
EXAMINEE found out that not only did Wameed make IEDS for Al-Qaeda, 
but he also placed them specifically to target US Forces in the Baghdad 
area. EXAMINEE worked as a local national linguist for the US Forces at 
the time and lived on a US base when HE found out about Wameed, but 
HE intentionally did not report Wameed to the US Forces. According to the 
EXAMINEE, Wameed allegedly died in 2005 or 2006 while placing an IED. 
He heard this from HIS friends. EXAMINEE also had several neighbors 
who were involved in attacks against US Forces during Operation Iraqi 
Freedom. EXAMINEE and HIS neighbors lived on a road in the Baghdad 
area that was frequently the location of insurgent attacks against US 
Forces. EXAMINEE knew which neighbors were involved in the attacks 
and who also worked for US Forces in Iraq, but HE did not report any of 
the activities to anyone. At that time, EXAMINEE was neighbors with 
these people for approximately 13 years, but when questioned in detail for 
specific names by the undersigned HE claimed HE could not remember 
any of them. When questioned whether HE ever had personal involvement 
in attacks on Coalition Forces, EXAMINEE denied any such activity. 
 
In 2006, EXAMINEE had another friend, Muhand (LNU), who regularly 
attended a radicalized Mosque in Iraq. Muhand told EXAMINEE the 
Mosque was operated by Al-Qaeda, and after each prayer session the 
Imam (no name) would advocate violence against the US and provided 
instructions on how to attack US Forces. EXAMINEE told Muhand that HE 
worked for the US Forces; had access to US bases; and showed Muhand 
photos of HIMSELF wearing a US military uniform. EXAMINEE did this as 
a means to encourage Muhand to obtain work with the US Forces. 
 
5 
 
EXAMINEE noted HE has not had contact with Muhand since 2006. On 
multiple occasions, EXAMINEE again reiterated that HE deliberately 
concealed all of the above information from US screening and 
investigative personnel because HE thought it “looked bad” and it would 
have a negative impact on HIS US citizenship and US residency. 
EXAMINEE maintained HE was worried about the above information 
during each previous polygraph session and now regretted not divulging 
this information to the previous polygraph examiner.  
 
Department Counsel did not call the author of the report as a witness during the 
hearing, but instead relied on the report itself.  
 
Administrative or official notice is taken of certain facts about Iraq as described in 
Department Counsel’s written request.8 The situation in Iraq is well known within the 
Defense Department and it is unnecessary to discuss those facts at great length here. 
In general, the overall security situation in Iraq is fluid and at times quite unstable if not 
deadly after many years of war. The risk of terrorism remains high.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.9 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”11 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.12 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.13 
                                                          
8 Exhibit 6.  
 
9 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
6 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.14 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.15 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.16 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.17 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.18 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.19 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct,20 the primary concern is that conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. In analyzing the 
facts and circumstances of this case, I have considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
company with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) 
untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or governmental protected information . . . ; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability.  
                                                          
14 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
15 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
20 AG ¶ ¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
 
7 
 
 As established by substantial evidence (Exhibit 2),21 Applicant made damning 
admissions during the course of a counterintelligence polygraph examination. His 
admissions epitomize both untrustworthiness and unreliability within the meaning of AG 
¶ 16(d). Although the Government’s case likely would have been stronger had they 
called the author of the report as a witness, the report is still persuasive and compelling 
because the information therein is clearly stated, detailed, and unequivocal.  
 
 Addressing the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(f), the report is not undermined 
because it is from a source of questionable reliability. Just the opposite is true, because 
the report is from a trained polygraph examiner employed by the U.S. Army who is 
skilled in interrogation. That is not a source of questionable reliability. Likewise, the 
report is not undermined because the information therein was unsubstantiated. Again, 
just the opposite is true. In reaching that conclusion, I considered Applicant’s lengthy 
testimony in which he explained the circumstances of the third session of the polygraph 
examination, the interrogation process, and his efforts to minimize or put in context (or 
both) the information in the report, including the cultural context of how the word “friend” 
is commonly used in Iraq.22 I also considered that, during cross-examination, he 
admitted many but not all the statements in the report.23 And I considered that the report 
may have errors or omissions as pointed out by Applicant (the 2004 start date as 
opposed to a December 2005 start date for his employment in support of the U.S. 
armed forces, and the omission of his reporting of another linguist for misconduct to an 
Army officer). Although those matters are not trivial or minor, they do not rise to a level 
where they constitute material errors or omissions that fatally undermine the information 
in the report as whole.   
 
 The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B for foreign influence is whether 
Applicant’s family ties to Iraq should disqualify him from access to classified information. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,24 the suitability of an applicant may be 
questioned or put into doubt due to foreign contacts and interests. In an ordinary or 
standard Guideline B case involving an applicant who has served in a combat zone 
under difficult and dangerous circumstances, as this Applicant has,25 I would decide the 
Guideline B matters in their favor. But this is not an ordinary case. The negative security 
implications from the damning admissions Applicant made during his June 2017 
polygraph examination logically spillover and taint the foreign influence matters. Given 
these circumstances, I am not persuaded that Applicant can be expected to resolve any 
potential concern or potential conflict of interest caused by his family ties to Iraq in favor 
of the U.S. interest.    
                                                          
21 Department Counsel’s burden of proof to establish facts controverted by an applicant is substantial 
evidence, which is a very low standard, less than a preponderance of the evidence, and far less than 
proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 
22 Tr. 76-97.  
 
23 Tr. 99-108 (See Department Counsel’s is-it-accurate questions).  
 
24 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
25 Tr. 61-64, 120-123 (describing the dangerous conditions).  
 
8 
 
 Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have doubts and concerns 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighted the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. In doing so, I 
considered the strong evidence of Applicant good employment record working as a 
linguist under difficult and dangerous conditions and his many highly favorable 
recommendations.26 He has an outstanding record as a linguist. Nevertheless, I 
conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
26 Exhibits A-K.  
 
