 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03035 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate the alleged security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, Guideline G, alcohol involvement, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 6, 2016. On 
November 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, 
Guideline G, alcohol involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 30, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 16, 2018. On March 23, 2018, a notice of 
hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 23, 2018. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. 
 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE C, which were 
attached to her Answer, were admitted without objection. She also testified. I held the 
record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation after 
the hearing, but she did not do so. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 
2018. The record closed on May 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f, and SOR ¶¶ 2.b-2.f. She “admitted” SOR ¶ 
3.b, but with an explanation that I construe as a denial. She did not answer SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
or 3.a, but since they are cross-allegations of conduct alleged and admitted under SOR 
¶ 1, I consider them admitted.1 Her admissions and other comments are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She has never married. She is a single mother to an 
11-year-old daughter. Applicant has a high school diploma and some college credits. 
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from 2008 until April 2016, when she received a 
general discharge under honorable conditions. Her highest rate was petty officer second 
class. Since May 2016, she has worked for a defense contractor at a naval shipyard. 
She has held a security clearance since 2012. (Tr. 26-28, 74; GE 1) 
 
Guidelines J & G:  
  
 Applicant was first exposed to alcohol at age 16, when she lived in Japan as a 
U.S. military dependent. She occasionally drank Japanese sodas with some alcohol 
content. She returned to Japan in 2008, in the Navy. While there, she consumed alcohol 
to intoxication on weekends. She returned to the U.S. in 2012 with the Navy. (GE 1; GE 
2 at p. 5 of Personal Subject Interview (PSI) # 1) 
 
 In July 2013,2 Applicant and another younger sailor were out socializing in an 
area club one evening. The other sailor was underage. They argued outside the club, 
either because Applicant’s companion consumed alcohol despite being the designated 
driver (Tr. 30-31) or because she was seeking to leave the club without Applicant. (GE 2 
at PSI # 1). Both of them were put in a “paddy wagon.” Applicant was charged with 
disturbing the peace. (SOR ¶ 1.e) The charge was later dismissed. Applicant 
                                                          
1 SOR ¶ 2.a (Guideline G) cross-alleges SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d and 1.f. SOR ¶ 3.a (Guideline E) cross-
alleges SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. 
 
2 SOR ¶ 1.e lists this offense as occurring in July 2014 (GE 1 at 29; GE 2 at p. 4 of PSI) rather than July 
2013, as shown by official records. (GE 3; GE 4; AE C) 
 
3 
 
acknowledged at hearing that she had been drinking. (Tr. 31-32, 66; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; 
GE 4; AE C)  
 
 In December 2013, Applicant was charged with assault and battery, public 
intoxication, and destruction of property. (SOR ¶ 1.f)(GE 1; GE 4; AE A; AE B) She 
testified that this arrest arose out of an altercation with a man whom she called a “fatal 
attraction.” (Tr. 30-31; 40-41) The nature of their relationship or interactions is not clear 
from the testimony, but in Applicant’s background interview she said the man followed 
her into a bar. (GE 2, PSI # 1) She denied at hearing that she had been intoxicated at 
the time of the arrest, though she acknowledged in her interview that she consumed 
alcohol that evening. (Tr. 63; GE 2, PSI # 1) Applicant also testified that this man 
caused her multiple broken bones and other injuries, resulting in several surgeries in 
2014-2015. (Tr. 30, 39, 83) 
 
 Applicant testified that she was a weekend drinker during this period. She 
testified that she would drink a glass of wine or a beer at home after work “just to wind 
down.” (Tr. 63) According to her first PSI, Applicant’s drinking pattern included mixed 
drinks, such as Long Island Ice Teas. (Tr. 63; GE 2) Later in the hearing, she 
acknowledged that she drank “a lot” when she was in the Navy. (Tr. 82) Applicant did 
not specifically acknowledge heavier drinking.  
 
 In February 2014, Applicant was admitted to the Navy’s Substance Abuse 
Recovery Program (SARP) for treatment of alcohol dependence. (GE 2 at 13) Applicant 
testified that it was an outpatient (Level II) program and that she self-referred. (Tr. 32-
33; GE 2 at 13) Both on admission and at discharge, Applicant was diagnosed as 
suffering from alcohol dependence, (SOR ¶ 2.b) as well as from depression NOS (not 
otherwise specified) and nicotine dependence. She completed the program in March 
2014. (GE 2 at 13) 
  
 Program records reflect that the requirements of the aftercare program included 
participation in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) at least weekly, and follow-up counseling. 
She was advised that she should abstain from alcohol. She testified that she completed 
the one-year aftercare program (Tr. 32-33; GE 2 at 13)  
 
 Applicant denied having any problems with alcohol during this period. She 
testified that, at the time, “when I self-referred myself, [sic] I didn’t see myself as having 
an issue from the beginning.” (Tr. 45) She attributed her diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence as being related to the medication she was taking. (Tr. 64-66) 
 
 Despite SARP’s advice that she should abstain, Applicant’s drinking continued. 
(SOR ¶ 2.c) (Tr. 47) In September 2015, Applicant went out to a bar with a friend, in the 
friend’s car. She consumed alcohol (Long Island Ice Teas, according to her PSI.) (Tr. 
66-67; GE 2). The friend had consumed more alcohol, so Applicant was the driver when 
they left the bar. Applicant was pulled over by police after driving on the wrong side of 
the road. She was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) (SOR ¶ 
1.d) According to her interview summary, Applicant’s blood-alcohol level was 0.14, and 
according to her charge sheet, it was over .20. (Tr. 33-35, 74-75; GE 2 at PSI # 1; GE 3) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was found guilty of DWI in December 2015. She was sentenced to 365 
days in jail, all but 10 days suspended, and 12 months of probation. She served the jail 
time on weekends. Her driver’s license was restricted for one year, and she was fined. 
Applicant was also ordered to participate in an alcohol safety-awareness program 
(ASAP). (Tr. 33-35; 68-69, 74-75; GE 1 at 31; GE 2 at PSI # 1) 
 
 In March 2016, Applicant was referred to the Navy’s SARP program for 33 days 
of inpatient treatment for alcohol use disorder, severe (as defined in the updated DSM-
V) (SOR ¶ 2.d)3 (GE 2) Applicant testified that inpatient (Level III) treatment was 
required because she had already been through inpatient (Level II) treatment. (Tr. 42-
43, 48; Answer) Applicant also claimed that she self-referred to the program: “I 
voluntarily went there to save money” as she prepared to transition out of the Navy. (Tr. 
48) Applicant was discharged from the SARP program on April 12, 2016. By the end of 
April 2016, she had been discharged from the Navy. (GE 1; GE 2) 
 
 As with her earlier time in SARP, Applicant was advised to abstain from alcohol 
as part of her aftercare plan in 2016 (GE 2) She was unable to participate in the Navy’s 
aftercare program because she had been discharged. She participated for a time in a 
civilian alcohol safety-awareness program (ASAP). (GE 2 at PSI # 1) There is no 
documentary evidence of Applicant’s participation in the record.  
  
 Between September 2015 and December 2016, Applicant had five interlock 
violations. (SOR ¶ 1.b) (Tr. 35) In her January 2017 PSI, she admitted that one of them 
occurred in August 2016 – after her inpatient treatment at SARP in early 2016, when 
she had again been advised to abstain from future alcohol use. (SOR ¶ 1.e)  In August 
2016, Applicant was charged with non-compliance with the ASAP program. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
(Tr. 38) 
 
 In October 2016, Applicant was charged with failure to appear at a court hearing. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a) Applicant said in her Answer and at hearing that she failed to receive 
notice of a court date because she had moved. Once she became aware of the matter, 
she went to court to sort it out, and she said no negative action was taken. (Tr. 37-38) 
Court records in evidence show she was in fact found guilty. (GE 4) In December 2016, 
Applicant was found guilty of violating the terms of her probation (SOR ¶ 1.b) and it was 
extended for six months, to June 2017. (Tr. 35-37)  
 
 From February 2017 to June 2017, Applicant received outpatient counseling for 
substance abuse, through a court-ordered ASAP program. There are no documents in 
the record relating to this program, but it corresponds with the extension of Applicant’s 
probation. She continued to consume alcohol after this treatment. (SOR ¶ 2.f) (Tr. 49; 
GE 2 at 5) 
 
 Applicant disclosed in her October 2017 Interrogatory Response that she had 
consumed alcohol as recently as August 1, 2017. (GE 2 at 5) She initially testified that 
she had not consumed alcohol since finishing probation in summer 2017. (Tr. 60-61). 
                                                          
3 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant’s 2016 SARP treatment was “outpatient,” when in fact it was inpatient 
treatment.  
 
5 
 
She later said she stopped consuming alcohol only upon receiving the interrogatories 
from DOHA, in October 2017. (Tr. 71) 
 
 Applicant testified that about a month before the hearing, several family members 
passed away (a grandmother, an aunt and an uncle). She attended a few Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings shortly before the hearing to help her cope with her grief, 
instead of returning to drinking. She has not had any alcohol treatment since leaving the 
Navy’s SARP program. She has not had any subsequent alcohol evaluations. (Tr. 49-
50, 57-59, 72-73, 84-85)  
 
 After spring 2016 the record contains no documentation about Applicant’s 
completion of any aftercare programs since she left the Navy. There is no 
documentation of any participation in AA or of any other alcohol counseling since then 
either. There is no record evidence of character references or recommendation letters.  
 
Guideline E:  
 
 In January 2017, right after her probation violation hearing in December 2016, 
Applicant had her initial PSI. She had a second PSI in March 2017. She authenticated 
and adopted both interview summaries in her Interrogatory Response. (GE 2)  
 
 In her January 2017, PSI, Applicant discussed her alcohol involvement and her 
various criminal offenses. Applicant also stated that an interlock device had been placed 
on her vehicle and would remain until June 2017. (GE 2, PSI # 1) She later said that 
she stopped consuming alcohol between her September 2015 DWI arrest and August 
2016. (GE 2, PSI # 1) Applicant did not mention any of her five interlock violations in her 
January 2017 PSI.  
 
 Applicant allegedly failed to disclose those violations despite being asked if she 
had any more alcohol-related arrests or incidents since her 2015 DWI. (SOR ¶ 3.a)4 In 
answer to that allegation, she said, “I admit. It didn’t cross my mind but I did give all info 
needed.” (Answer) 
 
 Applicant’s second PSI (PSI # 2) in March 2017 largely concerned her five 
interlock violations between September 2015 and December 2016, and her failure to 
disclose them during her earlier PSI. During the interview, Applicant said two of the 
violations were due to a false reading. This was caused, she claimed (without proof), by 
her use of a breathing inhaler which contained ethanol. She blamed the third violation 
on a friend, who she allowed to drive her car, but who had allegedly consumed alcohol 
prior to attempting to do so. This friend was also pregnant at the time. (Tr. 80-81; GE 2, 
PSI # 2)  
 
 In her second PSI, Applicant accepted personal responsibility for only one of the 
interlock violations (in August, 2016, as noted above). Applicant was confronted with 
                                                          
4 The text of SOR ¶ 3.a erroneously cross-references SOR “paragraph 1.a,” instead of SOR ¶ 1.b, the 
allegation concerning the five ignition-interlock violations. This typographical error was not addressed at 
hearing.  
 
6 
 
information showing that the blood-alcohol content level found for each violation was 
.107%, .020%, .023%, 086% and .141%, respectively. (GE 2, PSI # 2) It is not clear 
from the record when these violations occurred. Applicant admitted during her first PSI 
that she began drinking again in August 2016 (while still on probation). (GE 2, PSI # 1) 
At hearing, Applicant accepted responsibility for all five interlock violations. (Tr. 81) 
 
 When confronted about why she did not disclose the violations in her first 
interview, Applicant first claimed that the court date occurred after the interview. The 
court date was in December 2016, and the interview was a month later. Applicant then 
claimed she had a lot on her mind, and was focused on successfully completing her 
ignition-interlock requirements. In her second PSI, in her Answer, and at hearing, 
Applicant denied any intent to falsify in her first interview, and claimed that the interlock 
violations did not cross her mind at the time. (GE 2, PSI # 2; Answer; Tr. 51, 75-89) The 
interviewing agent did not testify. There is no record evidence of what Applicant was 
actually asked during PSI # 1 about the five interlock violations.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”6 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
7 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(d) violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program.  
 
 Applicant committed several alcohol-related criminal offenses between July 2013 
and September 2015. While on probation for her DWI, she had five ignition-interlock 
violations. She violated the terms of her participation in a court-ordered ASAP program 
by drinking alcohol. She was found guilty of failure to appear in October 2016. She was 
found guilty in December 2016 of violating her probation, and it was extended for six 
months, until June 2017. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(b), and 31(d) apply.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a problem with alcohol, and she has never really come to grips 
with it. She was treated twice while in the Navy for alcohol dependence, both inpatient 
and outpatient. Applicant’s alcohol issues led to a general discharge from the Navy 
under honorable conditions, in April 2016. She has alcohol-related criminal convictions 
that are both multiple and recent. On multiple occasions while on probation for her 2015 
DWI, Applicant proved unable to comply with the terms of her probation. Her probation 
was then extended until June 2017, less than a year before the hearing. Despite several 
periods of treatment for her alcohol use disorder, Applicant has also continued to 
consume alcohol. She consumed alcohol as recently as October 2017, and stopped, 
she says, only upon receiving the interrogatories from DOHA. Having left the Navy, she 
has little to no support network established to help her deal with her serious alcohol 
disorder. Her repeated failures to comply with the law are too frequent and too recent to 
mitigate. She also provided no documentary evidence of successful completion of her 
probation, or ongoing counseling. She provided no documents relating to a positive 
work record or constructive community involvement. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not 
apply. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following disqualifying condition is applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with an alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or licensed clinical social worker) of 
alcohol use disorder; 
 
9 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed;  
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and  
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.  
 
 Guideline J allegations ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d and 1.f are all cross-alleged under 
Guideline G at SOR ¶ 2.a. They are all established by the record evidence, and they all 
satisfy AG ¶ 22(a).  
 
 Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence in 2014 and alcohol use 
disorder, severe, in 2016, while in the Navy’s SARP program. AG ¶ 22(d) applies. 
Applicant was advised by SARP personnel during both periods of treatment for her 
disorder that she should abstain from alcohol use, yet has continued to drink. She also 
received further alcohol counseling in 2016 and 2017, while on probation for her 2015 
DWI after leaving the Navy, yet she continued to consume alcohol as recently as 
October 2017. AG ¶¶ 22(e), 22(f) and 22(g) all apply.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
 Applicant has not fully acknowledged the extent of her problems with alcohol. To 
begin with, she has never acknowledged being anything other than a social weekend 
drinker. She made one general statement at hearing that when she was in the Navy, 
she used to drink “a lot,” (including by drinking to intoxication on weekends). However, 
 
10 
 
she provided no testimony about having anything more than a drink or two either while 
out socializing with friends, or at home after work. Given that Applicant has diagnoses of 
alcohol dependence (in 2014) and alcohol use disorder, severe (in 2016), her testimony 
and interview statements about the level of her drinking is not credible.  
 
 Applicant completed both SARP programs, but her completion of the aftercare 
programs (particularly the more recent one) is undocumented and unverified. Having 
been given professional medical advice on multiple occasions to abstain from alcohol, 
she has not done so. She has not established a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant is no longer participating in any treatment program. She participated in 
AA on a few occasions right before the hearing to help her deal with the recent passing 
of several family members. But that is not sufficient evidence that she is participating in 
AA, or any other counseling program in any sustained way. It also cannot be said that 
Applicant has no previous history of treatment and relapse. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. 
AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply for the same reasons AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply in Guideline 
J, above. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol 
involvement security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
11 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
 
                     (2) any disruptive . . . or inappropriate behavior; and  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Guideline J allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d are all cross-alleged under Guideline E 
at SOR ¶ 3.a. Each of them is established by the record evidence. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 
16(d)(2) and (3) apply to SOR ¶ 3.a, as does the general security concern of AG ¶ 15.  
  
 Notwithstanding Applicant’s use of the words, “I admit” in her answer to SOR ¶ 
3.b, I regard her answer as a denial because she said she “gave all information 
needed.” Thus, the Government had the burden of proving the allegation.  
 
 In SOR ¶ 3.b, the Government alleged that Applicant failed to divulge her 
ignition-interlock violations to the interviewing investigator during her January 2017 PSI. 
The summary of that interview, which she authenticated and adopted in GE 2, does not 
mention the five ignition-interlock violations. Applicant went to court a month earlier, in 
December 2016, and her probation was extended to June 2017 (which she mentioned 
in PSI # 1). But she did not mention in PSI # 1 why her probation was extended. 
Applicant said that the interlock violations “did not cross her mind” at the time.  
 
 This explanation for her omission is not credible. In weighing Applicant’s 
credibility on this point, I also considered the credibility of her interview statements and 
testimony about her pattern of alcohol consumption. Applicant acknowledged that she 
drank “a lot” while in the Navy, including to the point of intoxication. But she never 
acknowledged that she has a more serious problem with alcohol (as she clearly does, 
given her repeat diagnoses). She also testified that her inpatient treatment in SARP in 
spring 2016 was so she could save money – not because she needed alcohol 
treatment. This, too, shows that she has failed to acknowledge the extent of her alcohol 
issues.  
 
 These findings weigh against Applicant’s overall credibility, and make it more 
likely that she deliberately failed to divulge her ignition-interlock violations during her 
initial interview, as alleged. Further, it is clear from reading the summary of PSI # 2 
(which Applicant also authenticated) that the interviewing agent confronted her about 
 
12 
 
them, and asked during the second interview why she did not disclose them during her 
January 2017 PSI. 
 
 The interviewing agent did not testify at hearing. Thus, it cannot be determined 
with certainty what it was Applicant was actually asked about concerning the interlock 
violations during PSI # 1. SOR ¶ 3.b incorrectly cross-references SOR ¶ 1.a (failure to 
appear) instead of SOR ¶ 1.b (five ignition-interlock violations). However, there is no 
evidence Applicant was confused by this typographical error, and it has no bearing on 
my findings. On balance, considering all the record evidence concerning this allegation, 
including Applicant’s testimony, I find that the Government established that Applicant 
failed to divulge her five ignition-interlock violations in her January 2017 PSI, and that 
she did so deliberately. AG ¶ 16(b) applies to SOR ¶ 3.b.  
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 As to SOR ¶ 3.a, AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply for the same reasons as 
set forth in the analysis of the mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and G, above. As 
to SOR ¶ 3.b, there is no evidence that Applicant attempted to correct her omissions 
before being confronted. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) also do not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(c):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
13 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant has yet to come to terms with the extent of her alcohol issues. I do not 
believe that she was fully candid at hearing about the extent of her drinking. While she 
may have lessened her drinking in the months before the hearing, she did so only when 
presented with interrogatories from DOHA, indicating to her, perhaps for the first time, 
that her clearance was in jeopardy because of her alcohol issues (and related criminal 
conduct). Applicant needs to establish a significant, sustained track record of 
abstinence, sobriety, appropriate counseling, and compliance with the law before she 
can again be considered a suitable candidate for access to classified information. 
Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol involvement, criminal conduct or personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3: Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
