 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 17-01358 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                 For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                                                     For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on 
October 30, 2017. He answered all allegations, provided evidentiary materials, and 
requested a determination on the written record. The Government converted the action 
to a hearing. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge on June 
18, 2018. It was reassigned to me on July 17, 2018, due to caseload considerations. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 18, 2018, setting the hearing for July 24, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  
 
The Government offered two documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-2. Applicant offered testimony and two certificates, accepted without objection 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
as Exs. A-B.2 The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 1, 2018, and the record was 
closed. Based on the exhibits, testimony, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old director of operations for a small company. He has 
served in that capacity for the last two of the five years he has worked there. Applicant 
has earned a bachelor’s degree in information technology. He met his wife in 1992 while 
they were in college. Married in 1999, they have two children, now aged 15 and 13.    
 
 Fourteen years ago, in 2004, Applicant and his wife were first-time parents. Their 
daughter was a colicky child, continuously crying throughout the night. (SOR Response) 
As a result, Applicant and his wife were constantly exhausted. At one point, when the 
child had an illness compounding her crying fit, Applicant let his wife stay in bed while 
he went to comfort the infant with a bottle. Neither the bottle nor holding the baby 
quelled her cries and screams. (Tr. 16) Ultimately, he had a lapse in judgment due to 
being sleep deprived. Trying to muffle the child’s crying, he applied pressure to a pillow 
placed over the child’s face. He did not know he was using too much force. (Tr. 16) 
When he realized the baby had passed out, he feared the worst. He successfully 
administered “a little bit of CPR, and she was fine.” (Tr. 16) While he subsequently tried 
to muffle the baby’s crying three or four more times by covering her mouth, he never 
again applied pressure to her face that limited her ability to breathe. (SOR Response)  
 
In 2005, Applicant and his wife had many arguments while she was pregnant 
with their next child. (Tr. 16-17) One argument accelerated and turned to character 
attacks beyond the initial focus of the spat. She would not let him remove himself from 
the fracas, so he “pushed her back and [his] hand ended up around her neck,” although 
he applied no pressure. (SOR Response) He released her immediately. At some point, 
the couple ended up on the floor. No other incidents have occurred between the two 
reflecting verbal or physical abuse. (SOR Response; see also Tr. 17-18) His wife was 
suffering from depression during that pregnancy, which she now realizes helped push 
their “argument over the line.” (SOR Response; see also Tr. 16-17) Applicant noted that 
they “always reconcile their differences and this was no exception. We still love each 
other deeply and we are still happily married today.” (SOR Response) 
 
Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant’s youngest child was crying inconsolably. 
Applicant went to attend to the baby. When nothing worked, he covered this child’s 
mouth to muffle her crying with his hand so as not to disturb her sibling or Applicant’s 
spouse. (SOR Response; Tr. 18-19) In so doing, he did not limit her breathing in any 
manner. (SOR Response) She had air the whole time. (Tr. 18) 
 
 In 2010 or 2011, Applicant was reported as having tried to choke his eldest child. 
(Ex. 2) He admitted, then later recanted part of the related details. Also in that period, 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s SOR answer and evidentiary materials were incorporated into the record for consideration. 
 
 
 
 
3 
he was driving his two children in the family van when his eldest child had a “meltdown.” 
(Tr. 19) When he decided to return home, she began kicking him from behind his seat 
“really hard.” (Tr. 19) He grabbed one of her legs and tried to hold it.” (Tr. 19) This did 
not settle the matter, so he pulled over and waited for the child to calm down.  
 
Later, apparently based on the choking attempt, child protective services (CPS) 
interviewed the girls in 2013 without the knowledge of either Applicant or his wife. They 
were asked “about a punishment, spanking, and abuse which they alluded to [sic] 
choking specifically, to find a pattern of any abuse from any parent. Both girls denied 
any such violence.” (SOR Response) CPS found no corroboration regarding abuse. 
CPS closed the case as unsubstantiated. (SOR Response, attachment; Tr. 24) 
 
 After facts concerning the 2010-2011 choking attempt had emerged, Applicant 
started taking corrective action. He completed an active parenting skills course and an 
anger management class in 2013. (SOR Response, Ex. A) Most recently, he 
successfully completed an on-line anger management course. (Ex. B) He was visibly 
contrite over his past judgment lapses. The family is now more harmonious, and he 
does not foresee having more children. (Tr. 24) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. The AG 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. In addition, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
 
 
4 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those granted access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions 
shall be in terms of the national interest and do not question an applicant’s loyalty.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant admits he covered a child’s mouth on a few occasions in 
about 2004 and between 2006 and 2007. There is evidence he choked his eldest child 
at some point between 2010 and 2011. He also admits that he got into a physical 
altercation including grabbing the neck of his pregnant wife with his hand in 2005. 
These factors are sufficient to raise disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
 This guideline provides seven potential mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17. 
Three are potentially applicable under these facts: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.    
 
 With regard to AG ¶ 17(c), seven years have passed since the last incident at 
issue. While that is a considerable amount of time, the acts cannot be said to be of the 
sort not to cast doubt on the Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
This is particularly true given the victims at issue were infants or youngsters and a 
pregnant spouse. While there are no plans for future children, the fact negative familial 
interaction appears to have recurred with one child in 2004 and then again in 2010-2011 
– with a gap of approximately seven years – is particularly worrisome. Indeed, it is 
similarly worrisome that Applicant employed choking as a mechanism for control on 
vulnerable family members about 10 times between 2004 and 2010-2011. Given 
Applicant’s past period of restraint with his eldest child lasted seven years (2004 – 
2010/2011), the same period of time that has passed since the last incident at issue 
(2010/2011 – 2018), more time is needed to demonstrate rehabilitation. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply. 
 
To his credit, Applicant has adapted to fatherhood and worked on his marriage. 
He has taken responsibility for his past displays of weakness, expressed remorse, and 
successfully completed coursework in anger management and parenting. His children 
are now teens, and there are no plans for additional children. In 2013, a CPS unit found 
no evidence indicating present abuse in the home. Applicant was contrite and honest at 
the hearing. While insufficient time has passed to demonstrate a recurrence is unlikely, 
the facts are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 17(d) in part and AG ¶ 17(e) in full.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct   
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Given Applicant’s admission to the assault-like instances set forth in SOR 
allegations 1.a-1.d, which occurred between 2004 and 2010-2011, both of the following 
disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness, and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:   
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 32(c): no reliable evidence that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
  
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.   
 
 As noted above, insufficient time has passed to demonstrate similar acts by 
Applicant are unlikely to recur. While the incidents involving infant children are unlikely 
to happen again, familial tensions do not constitute unusual circumstances. While 
Applicant may have recanted part of his concession regarding the 2010 or 2011 
incident, reliable evidence (ie. Ex. 2) exists that the incident occurred. AG ¶ 32(a) and 
AG ¶ 32(c) do not apply.  
 
 With regard to AG ¶ 32(d), however, I find Applicant provided sufficient evidence 
to raise this mitigating condition. In the seven years since the last incident at issue, he 
has completed anger management courses and a class on parenting skills. He has 
worked on his marriage and on parenting. He has been elevated at work to a senior 
operations position. A 2013 CPS investigation found no recent incidents of abuse. Such 
factors weigh in his favor toward raising this condition.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to the conduct at issue, I considered his 
present life, candor and behavior at the hearing, and credible explanations. 
 
The assault-like acts attributed to Applicant are particularly worrisome, especially 
with regard to the incidents involving infant children. Applicant is more than aware of the 
seriousness of his behavior, expressed appropriate contrition, and acknowledged 
 
 
 
 
7 
responsibility for his actions. Applicant has successfully completed relevant coursework, 
and worked on both his marriage and parenting.  
 
What remains troublesome is the pattern of violence Applicant perpetrated, 
intentionally or unintentionally, against his children and wife between 2004 and 2010-
2011. With regard to his eldest child, specifically, a seven-year period transpired 
between the first and last incident. Consequently, it is not unreasonable to conclude, 
under these particular circumstances, that a period of more than seven years without 
recurrence pass in order to mitigate the grave personal conduct security concerns 
raised. While I find Applicant has mitigated criminal conduct security concerns, I find 
that he failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
