 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01486 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 30, 2015. 
On August 10, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to me on November 8, 2017. 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel requested additional time before proceeding, and a hearing 
scheduled by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) for November 16, 
2017, was canceled. I was reassigned the case on February 5, 2018. DOHA issued a 
second notice of hearing on February 22, 2018, and the hearing was convened on March 
15, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
C were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional exhibits. AE D, including an e-mail, and attached information about 
his volunteer activities, father’s work, and his wife’s immigration status were submitted 
and admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on March 26, 2018. 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
During the hearing, the SOR was amended under my motion, to conform to the 
evidence to wit: SOR ¶ 1.c was amended to show Applicant’s “two” sisters are residents 
and citizens of India; and SOR ¶ 1.e was added to wit: your spouse is a citizen of India 
and resident of the United States; and SOR ¶ 1.f was added to wit: your in-laws are 
citizens and residents of India. The amendment and additions to the SOR were made 
without objections. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Republic of India. (HE 1) The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old senior program manager employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2016. He previously worked for another defense contractor from 
2012 to 2015. This is his first application for a DOD security clearance. Applicant holds a 
master’s degree in aerospace engineering awarded in 2012, and a master’s in business 
administration awarded in 2017, both from American universities. Applicant’s graduate 
engineering research project was funded by a DOD agency. He married in December 
2016, and has no children. Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of India, but resides in the 
United States with Applicant under a U.S. employment authorization, and has applied for 
permanent U.S. residency as a precursor to U.S. citizenship. 
 
Applicant was born and raised in India. He moved to the United States when he 
was 18 years old, to attend an American university, where he earned a bachelor’s degree 
in aerospace engineering, with honors, and then earned two master’s degrees. He 
worked for a U.S. company from 2012 to 2016. He began working for his current employer 
in 2016 in an advanced leadership program, and is now a program manager. He 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2015, and renounced his Indian citizenship. He purchased 
a home in the U.S. in 2013, and has about $40,000 in equity; a 401k retirement account; 
and savings of about $20,000. He has no foreign assets. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s grandmother, mother, father, two sisters, and in-laws are citizens and 
residents of India. His mother is a homemaker, and his father is a semi-retired business 
consultant in medical biotechnology, financial, and business management. Applicant’s 
parents are both U.S. permanent residents. Applicant’s father primarily aids Indian and 
U.S. companies with streamlining or unwinding company operations. He intends to fully 
retire within two years. One of Applicant’s sisters is a pediatrician in India, and the other 
is a homemaker. None of Applicant’s family have shown a particular interest in his jobs 
or security clearance status, and they have no connection to military or intelligence 
services.  
 
Applicant’s spouse is an Indian citizen, residing in the United States since 2017. 
She has a U.S. employment authorization, and she applied for permanent resident status 
in 2017. Her attorney attested that he expects her permanent residency interview to occur 
in the summer or fall of 2018, and for her permanent resident status to be granted. In 
August 2018, Applicant confirmed that they are still awaiting processing of her permanent 
resident application. The U.S. Government now estimates the time to process an 
application will take between 17.5 months to 35.5 months. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a 
stay-at-home mother and his father-in-law owns a rural cold-storage business to store 
farmer’s crops. His brother-in-law is a medical school student. Applicant has regular 
contact with his parents, and more limited contact with his siblings and in-laws. Applicant 
has extended family and family friends from India who are long-standing American 
citizens residing in the United States. He considers himself to be a loyal American citizen 
and vowed to report any efforts to compromise classified or proprietary information to the 
appropriate authorities. He acknowledged the danger posed to American lives if classified 
information is compromised. 
 
Applicant provided evidence of outstanding work performance, and letters from a 
colleague and director of his company lauding his performance, ethics, professionalism, 
and trustworthiness. Applicant is an active participant in science, technology, engineering 
and math (STEM) activities for disadvantaged youth, and mentors an elementary school 
student in need. 
 
India 
 
India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy. Recent elections were 
generally considered free and fair. In a 10-year old report, India was identified as one of 
the most active countries involved in economic and industrial espionage. They are also 
among the most active in U.S. trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy. The U.S. 
Department of Justice reported criminal prosecutions in several cases involving theft of 
U.S. proprietary scientific information and technology and transfers to private Indian 
citizens or companies, with suspected transfers to the government. India continues to 
experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. citizens, especially in the 
Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir. Anti-western terrorist groups are active in India, 
including Islamist extremist groups that target public places frequented by westerners. 
Indian police and security forces are known for human rights abuses including 
extrajudicial killings, torture, rape, corruption and other abuses. Indian counterterrorism 
 
4 
 
cooperation with the United States has been increasing, and the Indian government is 
committed to deepening bilateral cooperation of the full spectrum of terrorism threats. The 
U.S. and India are also cooperating to fight money laundering and terrorism financing.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
5 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
  
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant has varying degrees of contact with foreign family members who are 
citizens and residents of India. India was identified as one of the most active countries 
involved in economic and industrial espionage. They are also among the most active in 
U.S. trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy. India is also victimized by terrorist and 
has problems with conforming to human rights norms. These conditions create a 
 
6 
 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant moved to the United States from India when he was 18 years old, to 
attend an American university. He worked for a U.S. company from 2012 to 2016. He 
began working for his current employer in 2016 and is now a program manager. He 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2015, and renounced his Indian citizenship. He purchased 
a home in the U.S. in 2013, and has about $40,000 in equity; a 401k retirement account; 
and savings of about $20,000. He has no foreign assets. He has various contact with 
family members in India. His closest contact is with his parents. His mother is a 
homemaker, and his father is a semi-retired business consultant. None of his family have 
ties to military or intelligence agencies. Applicant does not own property or financial 
resources outside of the U.S., and his spouse is a resident of the United States with a 
pending application for permanent residency. He has close contact with his extended 
family in the United States who are long-standing U.S. citizens. 
 
I find it unlikely that Applicant’s relationships with family in India will place him in a 
position of having to choose between those persons and the interests of the United 
States. India is not known to target family members or U.S. citizens for intelligence 
activities. Additionally, Applicant has shown a deep relationship and loyalty to the United 
States that he can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States, and that his familial relationships in India are subordinate to his strong and 
long-lasting relationship to his life and family in the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) 
are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
I considered Applicant’s close and continuing ties to the United States, and his life 
in the United States over the past 11 years. I find that his devotion to the United States, 
as evidenced by his education, work history, and ties to his extended family in the U.S., 
mitigates any concerns raised by his foreign contacts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance based on the foreign influence 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
