                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                             )
                                                                      )
----------------------------------                   )      ISCR Case No. 17-03186
  )
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Brian Olmos,  Esq., Department Counsel
           For Applicant: Pro se.            
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement. Personal conduct concerns associated
with his alleged falsification of his security clearance applications cover his past drug use
are not mitigated.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 18, 2017, the Department of defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
under the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines why DoD adjudicators
could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance shouild be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended. DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive), and DoD 5200.02, Procedures for the Personnel Security Program (PSP)  
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 25, 2018, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another judge on March 23, 2018, reassigned to me on April
9, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on May 8, 2018. A hearing was held on the
scheduled date for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At
the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied
on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The Government’s exhibits were admitted
without objection. The transcript was received on May 16, 2018.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant is alleged to have used and purchased marijuana
from approximately 2007 to April 2016. Allegations also include charges in November
2012 of aggravated battery with a dangerous weapon and failed urinalyses administered
by the jail, testing positive for marijuana, for which he was ordered to attend drug court
for a weekly urinalysis test until the urinalysis results reflect no marijuana in his system
(which took two to three months to test clean of marijuana. Allegations of drug use and
purchases under Guideline H are also covered by Guideline J and are incorporated by
reference.
Under Guideline E. Applicant allegedly (a) continues to use and purchase
marijuana; (b) falsified his electronic questionnaires for electronic processing (e-QIP) of
June 2016 and September 2016, respectively, by omitting his past use and purchases of
marijuana. Under Guideline J, the allegations covered by Guideline H are incorporated
by reference.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his
drug activities and e-QIP omissions. Applicant did not answer the allegations pertaining
to Guideline J, and these allegations were withdrawn by the Government. Addressing the
drug-related allegations, Applicant claimed he stopped using and purchasing illegal
drugs prior to April 2016 (uncertain about dates). He claimed he no longer associated
with friends who used and purchased drugs after coming to work for his current
employer. And, he claimed he thought the question pertaining to his drug-related
omissions in his e-QIP referred to a much larger scale of drug users than smaller users
like himself.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, the Government withdrew the allegations covered
by Guideline J. Assigned grounds for the Government’s withdrawal were that the
allegations were adequately covered under Guideline H.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old communications engineer for a defense contractor. He
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant has never married and has no children. He attended an accredited
college between August 2009 and April 2010 but earned no degree or diploma. (GEs 1-
3; Tr. 58) He reported no military service. 
Since August 2016, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (GEs 1-3; Tr.
51) Between August 2006 and August 2016, he worked for non-defense employers in
various jobs that did not require a security clearance. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 30-31, 55-56) He
held an interim clearance with his current employer before it was rescinded following the
issuance of the SOR. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s drug history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in about 2007 (precise dates not recalled),
and he smoked it two to three times a week (mostly with friends) for the ensuing nine
years. (GE 3; Tr. 31-33) More specifically, between  2007 and April 2016, he used and
purchased marijuana two to three times a week on a regular basis because he liked it.
(GE 3) He acknowledged that he contributed money to his friends to purchase marijuana
to meet his personal needs. (Tr. 41)
While Applicant seemed to think he ceased using marijuana earlier in time than in
August 2016 (Tr. 38-40), he provided no corroborating evidence to warrant amending his
time-line admission in his response. For evidentiary purposes, his accepted span of use
extended from 2007 to August 2016. Applicant acknowledged his awareness of his
current employer’s anti-drug policy in effect when he last used marijuana. (Tr. 47) 
Following his arrest for aggravated battery with a dangerous weapon, Applicant
failed a drug urinalysis test and was court-ordered to attend a drug court for weekly
urinalysis tests until the urinalysis results reflected no marijuana in his system. (GE 3)
Applicant reported that it took two to three months of urinalysis testing to produce
negative test results . (GEs 3-4; Tr. 36-37)  Asked whether his employer was aware of
his positive drug test, Applicant indicated he did not believe his employer was aware of
the test and positive results.  (Tr. 52)
Applicant continued to smoke marijuana with friends after his 2012 drug-related
arrest and continued to associate with friends who still used marijuana in his presence
after he himself ceased using the substance. (GE 3; Tr. 45-46) His claims of
disassociation from these friends who use marijuana are not corroborated or
substantiated and cannot be accepted without more probative evidence. 
E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in June 2016, and again in September 2016,
Applicant omitted his past use and purchases of marijuana. (GEs 1-2) In his response,
he attributed his no answers to his belief that the questions posed in section 23 of each
3
e-QIP were concerned with sales and trafficking and did not apply to recreational users
like himself. 
Pressed at hearing to explain his reasons for his omissions of his drug
involvement in both e-QIPS, he revised his answers to acknowledge that he did not want
to disclose his past marijuana use and purchases (claiming he did not believe the
questions were serious ones) and, unaware of the repercussions of lying, he just wanted
to get on with his life. (Tr. 30-32, 42-46, 52-53) Applicant’s revised answers reflect
material lapses of candor and are entitled to more weight than the explanations he
provided in his response to the SOR allegations of falsification. 
Considering all of the evidence presented, Applicant’s revised explanations reflect
the most accurate reasons for his drug use and purchase  omissions.  While truthful, his
hearing explanations of his drug use/purchase omissions warrant drawn inferences of
knowing and wilful omission.
When initially questioned by an OPM investigator about his drug activities in a
follow-up OPM interview in November 2016, Applicant denied any past drug involvement
and was not confronted by the investigator with any drug-related information. (GE 3; Tr.
44) In a second interview conducted by another OPM investigator in April 2017,
Applicant was asked again whether he had any past drug use testing to report, and he
again answered in the negative. (GE 3; Tr. 44-45) This time, the investigator confronted
Applicant with information about his 2012 drug-related arrest. (GE 3) 
Once the OPM investigator confronted Applicant, he acknowledged the arrest and
proceeded to provide his whole history  of drug activity. (GE 3; Tr. 44-45) Applicant’s
drug-testing and drug-activity disclosures represent credible corrections but cannot
credibly be considered voluntary disclosures.  
Endorsements 
Applicant did not provide any personal endorsements from his supervisors and
coworkers. Nor did he provide any performance evaluations, character references, nor
evidence of community contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
4
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness,
both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.  AG ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
5
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  Because all security clearances must be clearly consistent
with the national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis
Applicant presents as a communications engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. Principal security issues in this case center on Applicant’s
drug involvement falsifications of his e-QIPs.
Drug concerns
Over a number of years spanning 2007 and April 2016, he used and
purchasedmarijuana two to three times a week on a regular basis. (GE 3) He
acknowledged t 
6
   Applicant’s admissions to using illegal drugs raise security concerns over risks 0f
recurrence as well as judgment issues. On the strength of the evidence presented, two
disqualifying conditions of the AGs for drug involvement and substance abuse are
applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse,” and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession of
a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale,
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”
Applicant’s significant recurrent use and purchases of marijuana over an
extended number of years (2007 to April 2016) raises questions over the strength of
his abstinence commitments. Because of the extended time and amounts of marijuana
usage and purchases availed of by Applicant, his recurrent involvement with the
controlled substance creates continuing security concerns. While Applicant’s recurrent
use of illegal drugs between 2007 and 2016 has never been resumed since April 2016
in any proven way, his drug activities make the likelihood of recurrent use too great to
facilitate safe predictions of continued abstinence.
Applicant, to his credit, has made noticeable gains in his efforts to mitigate his
past drug activities. Still, his multiple drug activities covered a considerable period (over
nine years) are still relatively recent, and have not been accompanied by any
cognizable counseling or programmatic rehabilitation. Considering the regularity and
quantity of his marijuana use and purchases over a substantial period time, most of the
mitigating conditions for drug involvement are not available to Applicant.
Because it is still unclear when Applicant ceased contact with his old friends who
continue to use marijuana, potential mitigating conditions, MC ¶ 26(b)(1),
“disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts,” and MC ¶ 26(b)(2),
“changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used,” are not available to
him at this time.  So, while Applicant’s assurances that his drug involvement is a thing
of the past are encouraging, more time is needed to draw safe inferences that he is not
a recurrence risk. 
Considering the record as a whole, at this time there is insufficient probative
evidence of sustainable mitigation to make predictable judgments about his  ability to
avoid drugs and drug purchases in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of
the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug activities over a nine-year
period, he does not mitigate security concerns with respect to the allegations covered
by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of the SOR.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness under Guideline E as the result of his use and purchases of illegal
drugs. Questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct
guideline (AG ¶ 15) Judgment concerns are tied to Applicant’s drug activities whether
considered under Guideline H or Guideline E.The same concerns that attach to
Applicant’s repeated drug involvement apply with equal force to the judgment concerns
7
associated with his drug activities under the personal conduct guideline. Because of his
omissions of his past drug activities raise separate trustworthiness concerns, they may
be considered independently as incorporated concerns raised under Guideline E. See
ISCR Case No. 06-20964, at 6 (April 10, 2008).  
Applicant’s continuing marijuana activities between July 2007 and April 2016
coupled with his deliberate omissions thereof in the e-QIPs he completed in 2016 invite
application of DC ¶¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or
award fiduciary responsibilities,” and 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations.” 
Applicant fully acknowledged his 2012 drug-related arrest only after being
confronted by an OPM investigator in a follow-up second interview in April 2017. His
full disclosures of his past drug use that he provided in the interview, while welcomed,
were neither prompt nor voluntary and preclude him from availing himself of the
mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts.” 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s active drug
activities between July 2007 and April 2016, his ensuing admissions under questioning
by an OPM investigator, and his explanations and whole-person considerations, are
insufficient to enable him to convincingly refute or mitigate personal conduct concerns
associated with his continued drug use and e-QIP omissions. Overall, Applicant’s
explanations are not enough to warrant conclusions that his judgment lapses
associated with his material drug activities over a period years and ensuing omissions
of his drug use in successive e-QIPs are mitigated. 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient 
probative evidence of his overall honesty, trustworthiness, and understanding of DoD
policy constraints on the use of illegal substances. He lacks enough positive
reinforcements, however, to facilitate safe predictions he is at no risk of recurrence.
Evaluating all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record, Applicant fails to
mitigate security concerns associated with the allegations covered by Guidelines H and
E.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
8
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):           AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.c: Against Applicant
      
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2. a through 2.g: Against Applicant 
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): WITHDRAWN
                 C   o nclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
9
