 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01751 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald P. Ackerman, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
August 16, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 1, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 13, 2017, scheduling the hearing for November 7, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one 
witness. Applicant presented 13 documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AppXs) A through M, and admitted into evidence. The record was left open until 
 
2 
 
December 7, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation, but Applicant offered 
nothing further for admission into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(TR) on November 15, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 10.) He has been employed with the defense contractor since 2013. (GX 1 at page 
10.) He has held a security clearance since 2003. (GX 1 at page 25, See also TR at 
page 46 line 8 to page 49 line 8.) He was never married, but does have two adult 
children. (GX 1 at pages 14~17.) Applicant attributes much of his past-due 
indebtedness to putting his sons through college. (TR at page 43 line 8 to page 46 line 
2.)  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor A, as the result of a 
voluntary car repossession, in the amount of about $13,901. He purchased an 
automobile for his ex-girlfriend, a real-estate agent who fell on hard times in 2008 with 
the collapse of the housing market. (TR at page 49 line 11 to page 52 line 23.) He has 
settled this debt for $7,000, as evidenced by a letter from the creditor (AppX D); and as 
such, it does not appear on Applicant’s most recent October 2017 credit reports (CRs). 
(TR at 20 line 16 to page 23 line 14, and AppXs A~C.) This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor B, as the result of credit 
card debt, in the amount of about $9,497. Unbeknownst to Applicant, his sons’ mother 
opened a credit card account in Applicant’s name, which she defaulted on. (TR at page 
23 line 20 to page 25 line 25.) As Creditor B charged-off this debt, said creditor would 
not accept any payments from Applicant. (Id.) Instead, Creditor B issued an Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-C, writing off said debt as a business loss, and for 
Applicant to consider as income when he next files his Federal income taxes. (TR at 
page 52 line 24 to page 54 line 12, and AppX E.) I find that Applicant is addressing this 
admitted past-due debt. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor C, as the result of an 
apartment rental, in the amount of about $5,825. Applicant’s former girlfriend locked him 
out of their apartment, but left without paying the past-due rent. (TR at page 26 line 3 to 
page 28 line 5, and at page 54 line 13 to page 57 line 18.) This debt “has been settled in 
full,” as evidenced by a letter from Creditor C’s “Collection Representative.” (AppX F.) 
This allegation is also found for Applicant. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor D, as the result of credit 
card debt, in the amount of about $819. Applicant has “satisfied” this debt, as evidenced 
 
3 
 
by a letter from Creditor D. (TR at page 28 line 7 to page 30 line 4, and AppX G.) This 
allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. and 1.j. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor E, as the result of 
two internet provider debts, in an amount totaling about $280. Applicant has “paid in full” 
these debts, as evidenced by a letter from Creditor D’s “Debt Collector.” (TR at page 30 
line 6 to page 31 line 15, at page 34 line 4 to page 35 line 24, and AppXs H and K.) 
These allegations are found for Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor F, as the result of a TV 
provider debt, in the amount of about $107. Applicant has “paid in full” this debt, as 
evidenced by a letter from Creditor F’s “Debt Collector.” (TR at page 40 line 20 to page 
42 line 5, and AppX N.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor G, as the result of a phone 
provider debt, in the amount of about $70. Applicant has “paid in full” this debt, as 
evidenced by a letter from Creditor G’s “Debt Collector.” (TR at page 31 line 17 to page 
32 line 18, and AppX I.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor H, as the result of a 
medical bill debt, in the amount of about $338. This debt has been “canceled”; as it was 
paid by Applicant’s medical insurance, as evidenced by a letter from Creditor H. (TR at 
page 36 line 11 to page 37 line 5, and AppX M.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.i. Applicant admits that he was indebted to Creditor I, as the result of another 
phone provider debt, in the amount of about $142. Applicant has “paid in full” this debt, 
as evidenced by a letter from Creditor I’s “Debt Collector.” (TR at page 32 line 20 to 
page 34 line 2, and AppX J.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant admits to significant past-due indebtedness The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has addressed all of his admitted past-due debts. He also successfully 
disputed the $338 medical bill as it was covered by his insurance. Applicant will no 
longer incur any education bills as his sons are both graduated adults. Furthermore, 
both the mother of his former children, and his former girlfriend, can no longer affect his 
credit. Applicant has thus demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.j.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
