KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant raised the sufficiency of the interview summary for the first time on appeal.
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03252.a1
DATE: 08/13/2018
DATE: August 13, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 17-03252
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jessica Coronado, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On October 13, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On May 25, 2018, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Pamela C. Benson denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30. 
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in finding that
Applicant’s omission of information from his application was deliberate and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under
Guideline F are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
served in the military from 2005 through 2010 and received an Honorable Discharge.1  He had some
delinquent debts, for such things as a credit card account, a delinquent car loan, and other accounts
that had been placed in collection status.  Applicant did not disclose his delinquent debts on his
application for a position of trust.  During his clearance interview, he initially advised that he had
no financial issues to report.  When confronted by the investigator with his delinquent debts,
Applicant stated that his problems were due to living beyond his means but that he had omitted this
information merely through oversight.  In his Answer to the SOR, he admitted that he had failed to
disclose his debts on his application but attributed the omissions to computer problems.
The Judge’s Analysis  
The Judge cleared Applicant of the trustworthiness concerns arising from his delinquent
debts.  However, she reached the opposite conclusion regarding Guideline E.  The Judge cited to
evidence that Applicant knew of his debts at the time he completed his application and during his
background interview.  She also cited to his inconsistent statements about his omissions and to his
initial denial of financial problems during his interview.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s
inconsistent statements impugned his credibility.  The Judge found that Applicant’s falsification of
his application raised trustworthiness concerns that were not mitigated.
1In his application, at p. 17, Applicant stated that he had received an Honorable Discharge.  During his clearance
interview, he acknowledged that he had received a General Discharge Under Honorable Conditions.  Item 3, Interview
Summary, at p. 4.  This was not alleged in the SOR and the Judge made no further reference to it.    
2
Discussion
Applicant denies that he deliberately omitted material information during the processing of
his application.  Among other things, he argues that the interview summary does not accurately
depict his answers to the interviewer.  He reiterates his contention that he left the information off
his application due to oversight.
Regarding the sufficiency of the interview summary, Applicant raised this matter for the first
time on appeal.  The File of Relevant Information (FORM) notified Applicant that the interview
summary was included as evidence.  The FORM stated that Applicant could comment on the
summary, and  make corrections, deletions, updates, etc. in order to make the summary accurate. 
The FORM, albeit in a footnote,  also advised Applicant that he could object to the summary on the
grounds that it was not authenticated and that, if he did not object, the Judge could find the objection
to have been waived and consider the summary as evidence.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM
made no reference to the summary and offered no objection to any government exhibits.  It was
reasonable for the Judge to conclude that any objection had been waived. 
We have considered Applicant’s arguments regarding the finding of deliberate omission in
light of the entirety of the record.  The challenged finding is supported by Applicant’s
acknowledgment to the interviewer that he had experienced financial problems for years, thereby
showing knowledge of his debts at the time he completed his application.  The finding is also
supported by the Judge’s adverse credibility determination, to which we are required to give
deference.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  The Judge’s statement that Applicant made inconsistent
statements is supported by the record, and inconsistent statements can undermine an applicant’s
credibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03778 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2017).  After considering the
record as a whole, we conclude that the finding of deliberate omission is supported by substantial
evidence, that is, “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support
a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See
also ADP Case No. 17-00260 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 25, 2018).
After considering Applicant’s brief as a whole, we conclude that he has cited to no harmful
error in the Judge’s decision. The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for the decision.  Refusal to provide truthful answers to lawful questions will normally
result in an adverse trustworthiness determination.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 15. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases
is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding security
clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).  See also
Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
