KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather,
it contains a number of documents that post-date the close of the record or the Judge’s decision. 
Those documents constitute new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot consider. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02677.a1
DATE: 08/14/2018
DATE: August 14, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02677
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 6,  2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On April 26, 2018, after considering the record, Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it
contains a number of documents that post-date the close of the record or the Judge’s decision.  Those
documents constitute new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant also mentions that she provided a document (an email) to the Judge about placing her
home for sale on the real estate market.  The email is part of the record of the proceeding
(Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) G), and Judge made findings of fact about the information contained in
that email.  
Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  The Board
does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases
in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Because Applicant has
not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security
clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale               
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
