KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s findings on the matters that Applicant has discussed are not erroneous. 
Applicant claims that he did not state that he might live in Afghanistan at some time in the future
but, rather, simply visit there.  The challenged finding is based upon Applicant’s testimony and
is sustainable. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03765.a1
DATE: 08/27/2018
DATE: August 27, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03765
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 8, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June
4, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born in Afghanistan, moving to the U.S. in the early 2000s and becoming a
U.S. citizen about 8 years after arriving here.  He has no spouse or children.  He stated that he had
renounced his Afghan citizenship.  He has been employed in his current job since late 2017.
Applicant left Afghanistan because the government there wanted him to enter the military. 
He lived in various other countries in the Middle East for many years and was eventually granted
entry into the U.S. through a refugee program.  He later returned to Afghanistan, living there for
about 2 years.  He opened a bank account there, transferring his funds from a U.S. bank and then
later back to that bank.  Although he maintains the account in Afghanistan, he has only about $100
in it.
Applicant has numerous siblings and other relatives who are citizens and residents of
Afghanistan.  He also has three siblings who are citizens of Afghanistan but who reside in Iran as
refugees.  These siblings traveled to Afghanistan to visit Applicant while he was there, and he
visited them in Iran for a period of about six weeks a couple of years later.  In doing so, he used an
Afghan passport because Iran would not permit him to enter using a U.S. one.  Applicant speaks by
phone with two of the three siblings who reside in Iran every three to four months.
Applicant also has several cousins who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  One of
these cousins serves in the military.  Applicant contacts his cousins from about every two weeks to
every two months.  He sends money to one of them to assist with expenses.  Applicant owns some
land and a car in the U.S. and has about $11,000 in savings.  Applicant testified that he may return
to Afghanistan in the future to live but will remain in the U.S. for now.
Applicant has received numerous certificates and letters of appreciation from his employers. 
He has participated in training events for U.S. forces, thereby contributing greatly to the success of
the exercises.  Applicant’s references applauded his expertise, professionalism, and outstanding
service.
2
Various extremist organizations are active in Afghanistan.  These groups target U.S.
personnel, including civilians.  The Afghan government struggles to control a remote region of the
country where terrorists operate.  The country endures threats from as many as 20 such
organizations.  Iran has been designated as a state sponsor of terrorism, cultivating operatives across
the globe.  The country poses a significant cyber threat against the United States.  Citizens of Iran
are not eligible to travel to the U.S., due to an increased likelihood that such persons pose credible
threats to the national security.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cited to her findings about the geopolitical circumstances of Afghanistan and Iran, 
to Applicant’s family contacts in those countries, and to Applicant’s uncertainty as to whether he
will return to Afghanistan to live.  She concluded that these matters evidenced a heightened risk that
Applicant could be subjected to foreign influence.   In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation,
the Judge noted the frequency with which Applicant contacts at least some of his relatives who live
in Afghanistan and in Iran.  Though noting Applicant’s commitment to working with Federal
contractors in support of U.S. missions overseas, the Judge concluded that it was too great a burden
on Applicant to expect him to be faithful to the interest of the U.S. and to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S.
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence of armed conflict in Afghanistan, as a consequence of which he
left the country and why some of his relatives moved to other countries.  He states that he has no
business interests in Afghanistan, that his family is not involved in terrorist activity, and that he has
no contacts with Afghan business organizations, the government there, or with any other group
except his family.  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence or to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01077 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Apr. 25, 2018).
Applicant argues that, “while in court I mentioned AT LEAST two errors I found in their
summary of my petition, i.e., one error misquoted me as saying my sister [name] . . . was alive . .
. also they misquoted me as saying I lived in [Foreign Country] six months when in fact I spent more
than six years there.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  It is not clear what document Applicant is referring to, 
although his interview summary describes the named sister as being alive.  Government Exhibit 5. 
In any event, the Judge’s findings on the matters that Applicant has discussed are not erroneous. 
Applicant claims that he did not state that he might live in Afghanistan at some time in the future
but, rather, simply visit there.  The challenged finding is based upon Applicant’s testimony and is
sustainable.  Tr. at 77. The Judge’s material findings are based upon substantial evidence or
constitute reasonable inferences from the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01181 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 30, 2018).
3
Applicant submitted additional argument and information after the date of his appeal brief. 
We are authorized to accept only one appeal brief from a party.  Directive ¶ E3.1.30.  See also ISCR
Case No. 14-04926 at 1 n.1 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016).  In addition, the later submission contains
new evidence, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Board placed the second
submission in the file.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
