 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01498 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) by Applicant’s repeated failures to timely file his state income tax 
returns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 16, 2015, 
seeking to continue a security clearance that was granted in December 2005. On 
December 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 6, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 7, 
2018, and the case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018. On May 21, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 12, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until June 25, 2018, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX B through O, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old pipe welder employed by a defense contractor since 
June 1974, when he graduated from high school. He married in April 1978. He and his 
wife have two adult children. Applicant has a 10-year-old son from another relationship.  
 
 Applicant lives in one state and works in another. The SOR alleges that he failed 
to timely file state income tax returns in his state of residence (SOR ¶ 1.a) and his state 
of employment (SOR ¶ 1.b) for tax years 2010 through 2016. 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not file his state income tax returns in either state 
because co-workers advised him that filing a tax return was not required if he was 
entitled to a refund. Applicant knew that he was entitled to refunds, and he decided to 
use the state tax authority as a savings bank and accumulate funds for his retirement, 
about three years away, and draw interest on the uncollected refunds. (Tr. 19, 25.) He 
has never failed to timely file his federal income tax returns, and he was entitled to 
refunds of federal taxes paid for all tax years from 2010 through 2017. (Tr. 37; AX H 
through O.) 
 
 Applicant realized that he had been given bad advice by his co-workers when he 
was interviewed by a security investigator in January 2017. He hired a tax professional 
to assist him, for a fee of $1,100. (AX E.) All past-due returns were filed on October 25, 
2017. (AX H through O.) He paid his state of residence $268 for taxes due for tax year 
2011 and $284 for taxes due for tax year 2015. (AX B and C.) In April 2018, he paid his 
state of residence $379 for taxes due for tax year 2017. (AX D.) For all other tax years, 
he was entitled to refunds from both states. In February 2018, he received a “letter of 
good standing” from his state of employment, stating that there were no outstanding 
assessments or delinquent notices on file. (AX A.) In June 2018, he received a “letter of 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
3 
 
good standing” from his state of residence, informing him that he was in compliance for 
all tax years through 2017. (AX G.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 
4 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
and after the hearing establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s failure to timely file state tax returns was 
recent and spanned seven tax years, but his gullible belief in the bad tax advice he 
received from co-workers was an unusual circumstance making recurrence unlikely 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is established. Applicant has filed all past-due returns, paid the taxes 
due, and is in good standing with the tax authorities of both states. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has worked for 
defense contractors since graduating from high school and held a security clearance for 
most of that time. A security clearance adjudication is not a tax-enforcement procedure. 
It is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The fact 
that Applicant has filed his past-due returns “does not preclude careful consideration of 
Applicant’s security worthiness based on longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility.” ISCR Case No. 12-05053 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014). A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of 
good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
ISCR Case No. 15-00216 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2016), citing Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 
U.S. 886 (1961). This case is unusual, in that Applicant timely filed all his federal 
income tax returns but was misled by bad tax advice from co-workers. As soon as he 
recognized his mistake, he hired a tax professional, filed all past-due returns, and paid 
the taxes due. His compliance with the federal tax rules and his prompt response upon 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
learning that he received bad tax advice negates a finding that he is unable or unwilling 
to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his repeated failures to timely file state income 
tax returns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
