 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-04204 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On December 22, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on April 9, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on April 17, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided no response 
to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 4, is admitted 
into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. She graduated from high school in 1998 and took some 
college courses but did not obtain a degree. Applicant has been employed as a supply 
technician by a federal contractor since April 2007. She reports no military service and 
she was never married. She has two adult children. Applicant disclosed in section 26 of 
her Questionnaire for National Security Positions or security clearance application 
(SCA) that she had some financial delinquencies including a vehicle repossessed in 
2016 after it broke down and she could not afford to fix it.2  
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, which pertained to credit-card debts, medical debts and an 
automobile repossession. In SOR ¶ 1.a, her vehicle was repossessed after it broke 
down shortly after she purchased it in early 2016, and it required over $2,000 in repairs 
for transmission problems. In her interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator in August 2017, Applicant stated she had no intention of paying this 
debt because the vehicle was resold by the creditor. (Item 3)  SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are 
delinquencies resulting from co-payments owed on medical debts. (Answer) The debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d (an account placed for collection by a utility provider in the amount 
of $9,665) was from Applicant’s previous residence.    
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b ($835 that was charged off) for an 
account opened in March 2006 and charged off in March 2017. (Item 4) No explanation 
was provided about this delinquency. SOR ¶ 1.c concerns a revolving credit-card debt 
that was charged off in April 2016 in the amount of $542. (Item 4) SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f 
are delinquent debts owed to collections attorneys for two different accounts that were 
opened in December 2015 and reported delinquent in 2017. (Item 4) All of the 
allegations in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s credit report of August 11, 2017. 
She hasn’t offered any documentation to explain how she incurred these debts, and 
how she plans to pay them.    
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.3 
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s July 31, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 2), and summary of interview on August 23, 2017. (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 2.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and othisevidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rathisthan actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
othisissues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, 
mental health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or 
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of 
income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal 
activity, including espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by her credit 
report, answer to the SOR, and her clearance interview of August 2017. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.4 Applicant has not met that 
burden. None of the delinquent debts have been adequately addressed with 
corroborating documentation.  
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant is a single mother struggling to put her children through college. 
Arguably, these conditions were beyond her control. However, she has not produced 
documentation, or furnished any explanation, with her Answer to the SOR, or in 
response to the FORM, to establish that she has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She has known about her financial problems and the concerns they 
caused to the government for at least one year since the OPM interview. Applicant has 
the burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under 
control, and that her debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. She has not met that burden.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant did not provide any details 
with documentary corroboration about what she did to address her SOR debts. She did 
not provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts such as: (1) proof of 
payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter 
from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;5 (3) 
                                                          
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
 
6 
 
 
credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debts 
and why she held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment 
plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to 
resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was crucial for her 
to provide credible documentary evidence of resolution of the debts in the SOR. (FORM 
at 2 - 3)  Applicant provided no documentary evidence that she paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved the SOR debts. She did not describe 
financial counseling or provide her budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant that she had 
30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response 
setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. 
If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will 
be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the 
evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not met her burden 
of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
