 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-03684 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 26, 2016. On 
November 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant 
answered the SOR on December 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on January 11, 2018, and 
the case was assigned to me on March 16, 2018. On April 26, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
May 22, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted, without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G were admitted, without 
objection.1 I received the completed transcript (TR) on June 7, 2018. I held the record 
                                                          
1 On January 11, 2018, a discovery package was sent to Applicant. I marked that as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I, but did not admit it into evidence. 
 
 
2 
 
open until July 24, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. He timely 
submitted AE H through AE L, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He has worked as a customer service lead for his current 
employer since April 20178. He will be hired by a defense contractor if he receives a 
security clearance. This is his first security clearance application. Applicant has been 
married to his wife since 2008, and they have one child. He graduated from college in 
December 2001. 
 
Applicant admitted to the five debts alleged in the SOR, which total $37,300. 
Applicant attributes his financial issues to a period of increased expenses while he was 
employed at a company (Company A), unemployment after he left his job at Company A, 
and a period of underemployment.  
 
Applicant started working for Company A in 2008. In approximately 2014, he was 
required to drive his personal vehicle extensively for work, which decreased the quality of 
life for his family and increased his expenses, resulting in financial difficulty. (TR at 13, 
52-53) In May 2016, Applicant left his job at Company A, where he earned a base salary 
of $64,000, to seek training and certification in the help-desk field. He had approximately 
$17,000 saved to prepare for this job change. His wife was working full-time as well, 
earning approximately $35,000 a year. Applicant was certified in June 2016, and 
immediately sought employment in the help-desk field. (TR at 13-14, 18-20, 52-53) 
 
Applicant was offered a job by a defense contractor in July 2016, pending a 
security clearance investigation. (TR at 14) He believed the security process would be 
relatively quick and he would start the new position in a month or two. However, in 
December 2016, his clearance was still pending, and he had depleted his savings. To 
provide for his family, he obtained work at Company B, earning $13.50 an hour. He was 
unable to continue paying the debts alleged in the SOR. (TR at 14, 53-55) 
 
In April 2017, Applicant started working at Company C at $17.50 an hour and tried 
to resume making payments to his creditors, but often times fell short. He continued to 
make sporadic payments to his creditors until the summer of 2017. Applicant was willing 
to pay the SOR debts, but he was unable to afford to make payments and pay for his 
family’s mortgage, utilities, and basic necessities. (TR at 30, 35-37, 55-56; GE 2) 
 
In December 2017 Applicant hired an attorney to file for bankruptcy protection. (AE 
A; AE B) Two months later, the Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was filed and accepted. 
(AE C) All the alleged debts were included in the bankruptcy petition. Additionally, he 
attended bankruptcy-related credit counseling in December 2017 and debtor education 
in March 2018. (AE E; AE F; AE G) In June 2018, Applicant’s bankruptcy and the debts 
alleged in the SOR were discharged. (AE K) 
 
Prior to filing for bankruptcy, Applicant attempted to pay and resolve his debts. In 
the summer of 2015, he voluntarily turned in his vehicle to the dealer, which is alleged as 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. He was never late on the car payments, but could no longer afford the $550 
monthly payment and the additional expenses related to the extensive work travel. In 
August 2015, Applicant started making monthly $200 payments to resolve the outstanding 
balance. He continued to make payments until November 2016, when his financial 
reserves were exhausted. (TR at 18, 21-22, 27-28; GE 2 at 4) In October 2015, Applicant 
hired a reputable debt-consolidation company to help him pay and resolve his debts, 
which were related to his employment at Company A. He made monthly payments of 
$536 until the fall of 2016, when his savings were depleted. Applicant also attempted to 
modify his home loan to reduce his expenses. (TR at 18, 21-22, 27-28, 31-34, 50-51; GE 
1 at 32; GE 2) 
 
Applicant provided documentation showing that his current finances are in good 
standing and he has no new delinquent debts. This documentation also demonstrates 
that all of the debts alleged in the SOR were discharged. (AE L) He follows a written 
budget. (TR at 49; AE J) Applicant also provided two letters of recommendation reflecting 
his reputation for honesty, trustworthiness, and professionalism. One of the letters was 
written by a person who holds a security clearance and is familiar with Applicant’s 
employment issues and financial delinquencies. (AE H; AE I)  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.2  
 
  
 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence establish two disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant experienced personal financial issues related to his employment at 
Company A. As a result, he sought credit counseling to resolve his debts in a responsible 
manner. Additionally, when he took a reasonable and calculated risk to change his 
employment, he had savings, and his wife was employed. Within 45 days of leaving 
Company A, Applicant was offered a job with a defense contractor. Unfortunately, he was 
under the impression that the adjudication of his security clearance would be timely. 
When his savings were depleted, Applicant took low-paying positions to provide for his 
family and continued to try to make sporadic payments toward the debts alleged in the 
SOR. His actions demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.  
 
Applicant filed for bankruptcy as a legal avenue of last resort. His debts were 
discharged, and he has no new delinquent debt. He and his wife are willing and able to 
live within their means, which is reflected in the testimonial and documentary evidence. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) was established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. 
 
I conclude Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. He mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns and established his eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
