 
1 
                                                               
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
   )    CAC Case No. 17-01992 
   ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient information to mitigate Common Access 
Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised under criminal or dishonest conduct 
supplemental adjudicative standards. He provided sufficient information to mitigate the 
material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud allegation. CAC eligibility is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for non-sensitive 
positions (Item 3, SF 85). On November 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (Item 1) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for 
Common Access Credential eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). Specifically, the concerns raised were criminal or dishonest 
conduct, and false statement, deception, or fraud. DOD was unable to find that granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in 
Department of Defense Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 22, 2017, and requested a decision 
based on the record (Item 2). He admitted the criminal or dishonest allegations, but 
denied the allegation concerning material, intentional false statement. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 30, 2017. Applicant 
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 12, 2017, and was 
provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on March 9, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, and a 2003 high school graduate. He has been 
employed as a communications technician by a DOD contractor since June 2016. He 
was steadily employed in non-DOD positions from 2011 until 2016. He seeks CAC 
eligibility as a condition of his employment with the DOD contractor. (Item 3, e-QIP). 
 
Applicant admits, and criminal records (Item 5) confirm, that Applicant was 
convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) in December 2010, indecent exposure 
and open container in December 2011, and simple assault with hands and fists in April 
2016. He failed to list these convictions on his Declaration of Federal Employment 
submitted on July 11, 2016. (Item 4).  
 
 CAC credentialing concerns were identified during Applicant’s background 
investigation. Applicant was 24 years old when he was arrested for the misdemeanor 
offense of DUI, 26 years old when arrested for the misdemeanor offense of indecent 
exposure and open container, and 30 years old when convicted of the misdemeanor 
offense of simple assault with hands and fist. The criminal records do not contain the 
details of the offenses or the sentences imposed for the convictions.   
 
Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal Employment on July 11, 2016. He 
responded “no” to the question asking if in the last seven years he had been convicted 
of any offense, including misdemeanors. (Item 4) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
noted that he misunderstood the criminal conduct question. He thought the question 
pertained only to felonies and imprisonment time. He did not realize he had to list 
misdemeanor offenses. He denied intentional falsification of the information. (Item 2, at 
page 3) 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
 
3 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reason to believe, based on the 
individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. (DODI 
5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4)  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, lists at paragraph 2.b two conditions that raise CAC concerns and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(1) A single crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety of 
people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information . . . and  
 
(2) charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to safely of people and 
proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 
4 
 The Government established these two disqualifying conditions through 
Applicant’s admissions and the information contained in the criminal history reports.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, sets out relevant factors 
that may mitigate an unacceptable risk. The mitigating factors at paragraph 2c include:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in mature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; 
 
(3) Improper or inadequate advice from authorized personnel or legal 
counsel significantly contributed to the individual’s omission of information. 
When confronted, the individual provided an accurate explanation and 
made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation; 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant pled guilty to the offense so 
there is sufficient evidence that the charges are established and correct. The offenses 
are recent, having been started eight years ago and continuing until two years ago. 
There is no evidence to suggest that the criminal conduct happened under unusual 
circumstances and is not likely to recur. While the offenses are misdemeanors, they are 
the type of offenses that pose a direct threat to the safely of people and property. 
Applicant has failed to present sufficient information to mitigate the CAC eligibility 
concerns.  
 
Intentional false statement, deception, or fraud 
 
 A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in 
connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk. Applicant’s failure to report his criminal conviction on the federal 
employment application raises the following disqualifying conditions at paragraph 3 of 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4: 
 
(a) An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk; and  
 
 
5 
(b) Conditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional 
falsification, deception, or fraud elated to answers or information provided 
during the employment process for the current or a prior federal or 
contract employment (e.g. on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
Circumstances that may mitigate the unacceptable risk at paragraph 3.c 
are: 
 
(1) the misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
(2) the misstatement or mission was unintentional or inadvertent and was 
followed by a prompt good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 
  The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant misunderstood the question 
concerning criminal offenses and did not realize he had to include misdemeanor 
offenses on employment application. The notation that misdemeanors should be 
included is contained in parenthesis at the end of the notice and can be confusing to a 
reader. I find that the omission was unintended and inadvertent. In his response to the 
FORM, Applicant admitted his error and admitted the criminal behavior. Applicant’s 
explanation for his omission is credible. The intentional false statement allegation is 
mitigated. After a careful considered of the facts of this case, I conclude Applicant’s 
request for CAC eligibility should be denied.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material, Intentional False Statement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
