                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  17-01666          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
 
Statement of Case
On June 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect when the SOR was issued would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 2, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to another judge on March 23, 2018, and reassigned to me on April 9,
2018. The case was scheduled for hearing on May 8, 2018. The Government’s case
consisted of five exhibits. (GEs 1-5) Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and nine 
exhibits. (AEs A-I) The transcript was received on May 16, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with his student loan payment history
relative to SOR debt ¶ 1.a and document creditor payments to SOR debt ¶ 1.b. For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department
Counsel was afforded three days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant provided documented copies of his
rehabilitation agreement with his Department of Education (DoE) student loan lender and
payments and payment arrangements with SOR creditors ¶ 1.b-1.c and 1.e-1.h.
Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs J-O.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated a delinquent student debt
exceeding $96,000 and seven delinquent debts exceeding $20,000. Allegedly, these
listed debts remain unresolved and outstanding.
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the listed SOR debts with
explanations. He claimed to have been through extenuating circumstances, leading to
financial burden that he would explain in his attached documents. He claimed he chose a
path to support his family and avoid bankruptcy, which would tarnish his credit (sic). He
claimed to be working to fulfill all of his financial obligations over the past four years and
recently took a position with his most recent employer to help his financial situation and
increase his quality of life. 
Addressing risks of engaging in illegal or otherwise questionable acts for financial
gain, Applicant claimed he could never be swayed to expose sensitive information. And
he claimed he hoped he could continue to improve the U.S. Navy and demonstrate his
loyalty.
2
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted are incorporated by
reference. Additional findings will follow.
Background
Applicant married in September 2005 and legally separated in February 2011.
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 31-32, 35) He has two children from this marriage who for several years he
raised as a single parent without any financial support from his wife. (Tr. 27, 32, and  34-
35). To date, he and his wife have not finalized their divorce, mainly out of Applicant’s 
concern for keeping his wife on his health insurance policy. (Tr. 38 and 45-46) 
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in December 2002
from a respected university. (GEs 1-2) Since then, he has taken several college courses
from other colleges and earned several certificates. (Tr. 30-31) Applicant reported no
military service. 
Since July 2016, Applicant has been employed by his current employer. (Tr. 33)
Between 2000 and 2016, he worked for other employers in the field of electrical
engineering. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 32-33)
Applicant’s finances
In November 2007, Applicant co-signed for his wife’s private student loans. (GEs
1-5; Tr. 37) The loans exceeded $120,000. (GEs 1-5 and AE A) In their separation
agreement, Applicant’s wife agreed to assume responsibility for the entire loan balance.
(AE A; Tr. 38 and 44-45) Before their separation in February 2011, Applicant’s wife bore
full financial responsibility for the loans, and the two of them maintained her student loans
in current status. (GEs 3-5) Once they separated, in 2011, she lost her job, and she
ceased making monthly payments on her loans. (GEs 3-5; Tr. 27-28, 38-39) After a year
of non-payment of her loans, the lender notified Applicant of his wife’s loan defaults. (GEs
1-2) And, for several years thereafter, Applicant made payments on his wife’s student
loans. (GEs 1-2; Tr.  Tr. 28-29, 36 and 48-49)  Applicant’s wife resumed her student loan
payments in July 2015, once she returned to working, and documented her resumption of
payments, along with her providing financial support for the children. (AEs A-B and J; Tr.
29, 36, 40, and 48) 
Credit records document that before their separation in 2011, Applicant and his
wife maintained excellent credit. (GEs 1-5) Since their student loan default, his wife’s
student loan debts have been transferred to a government-guaranteed lender and the
creditor substituted Applicant’s wife as the sole obligor on the loans. (AEs B and J)
Applicant is no longer responsible for his wife’s student loans as a co-signatory.  (AEs B
and J) And, while his divorce is not final, he no longer bears any financial responsibility for
his wife’s loans. (AEs A-B)  Applicant documented his being removed from the student
3
loan he co-signed for his wife (SOR ¶ 1.a). The creditor 1.a payment profile he provided
with his post-hearing submissions reports a total current balance owing of $98,854 with a
zero balance owing as of May 2018. (AE J) The submission corroborates and
substantiates Applicant’s claims that his wife is keeping her student debts in current
status.                     
Besides his listed delinquent student loans, Applicant accumulated several
delinquent consumer loans: SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b ($18,968); 1.c ($11,964); 1.d ($299); 1.e
($143); 1.f ($255); 1.g ($310); and 1.h ($120). He attributed his delinquent debts to his
spousal separation and inadequate income in his previous employment to cover the
shortfall from his separation. (GE 2; Tr. 62-63)   
Applicant has since documented his payoffs of SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b ($7,250); 1.h
($120); 1.e and 1.h (medical debts totaling $453); and 1.f ($165), which are covered by
AEs E, K-M, and O; Tr. 49-61 and 78-93) And, he documented a payment agreement in
place with creditor 1.c. (AE N)
Currently, Applicant and his wife split their custody of the children and share
financial support for them. (Tr. 40-41) Both Applicant and his wife “make good money”
and have stabilized their finances. (Tr. 41-42 and 63-64) Applicant nets $1,414 a week
and has a 401(k) retirement plan with $69,116 in the plan. (AEs F-G) 
Character references
Applicant is well regarded by his engineering manager. (AE I) His manager
credited Applicant with being trustworthy individual with extensive knowledge in his
assigned fields attributable in part to his experience working for the Navy and various test
laboratories. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
4
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
5
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent student
loan and consumer debts following his marital separation in 2011. Applicant’s
accumulated debt delinquencies warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, evaluation of an applicant’s delinquent debts are critical to an
assessment of the applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following
rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to
holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s separation
from his wife and his ensuing assumption of payment responsibility for his wife’s student
loans he co-signed for and other debts he assumed as a single parent afford good
grounds for crediting him with extenuating circumstances. 
6
Based on his cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” partially applies to
Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s wife has since resumed her payment responsibilities for her student
loans and brought her student loan accounts current. Addressing his remaining debts,
he has either paid or otherwise resolved them. Based on the resolution of the student
loan debts he co-signed for and his most recent payment initiatives with his remaining
debts,  Applicant  may claim the mitigation benefits of the “acting responsibly” prong of 
MC ¶ 20(b), as well as the benefits of another mitigating condition.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” is fully applicable. See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App.
Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
In Applicant’s case, he has addressed his listed student loan and consumer debts and
resolved them with payoffs (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d-1.h) and satisfactory payment
arrangements with SOR creditor 1.c.
Whole-Person Assessment
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability,
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the financial issues raised in the
SOR, but the contributions he has made to his employer and the defense industry in
general.  Favorable credit is also warranted for the corrective steps Applicant has taken
with his creditors. 
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances are promising and
enable him to overcome any reasonable doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability,
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted
that his finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility
requirements for holding a security clearance. Financial concerns are mitigated. 
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h.  Criteria for
meeting the eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance are satisfied.   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
7
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:                           For Applicant
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
  
9
10
