                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                              )
                                                                       )
---------------------------------                     )       ISCR Case No. 17-02102
  )
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Brian Olmos,  Esq., Department Counsel
           For Applicant: Pro se.            
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement. Financial consideration concerns are not
mitigated.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 21, 2017, the Department of defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
under the drug involvement and financial consideration guidelines why DoD adjudicators
could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance shouild be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended. DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive), and DoD 5200.02, Procedures for the Personnel Security Program (PSP)  
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 5, 2018, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another judge on March 23, 2018, reassigned to me on April
9, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on May 9, 2018. A hearing was held on the
scheduled date for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At
the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-7). Applicant relied
on one witness (himself) and four exhibits (AEs 14). The Government’s exhibits were
admitted without objection. The transcript was received on May 17, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with satisfaction of the two respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant furnished documentation from a predecessor of
creditor 1.a that Applicant does not owe them any money and from creditor 1.b that
theyno longer maintain records of the listed judgment debt. Applicant's submissions were
admitted without objection as AEs E-F.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly used marijuana with varying frequency 
between December 2015 and November 2016. Allegedly, he used marijuana after being
granted a security clearance in June 2011.
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated two delinquent debt 
exceeding $15,000. Allegedly, these listed debts remain outstanding and unresolved.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his
drug activities and finances with explanations. He claimed his use of drugs was a short  
lived  hobby that we will not repeat. He further claimed he will be relocating to another
state, and he hopes the new environment will help him promote his continuing
abstinence from drug use (now one and one-half years)
Addressing his finances, Applicant admitted each of the allegations covering the
listed delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b with explanations. He claimed that he and
his sister co-signed for the purchase of a vehicle in 2009 for his mother who needed a
car for transportation. (Applicant's response) This vehicle (covered in SOR 2.a) was later
repossessed by the lender in 2010. He further claimed that the lender was acquired by
another entity that continued to report delinquent payments for the next few years
without acknowledging the repossession. 
Applicant further claimed in his response that the reported loan balance has since
been removed from his credit report, as of January 2018 (for reasons not recited by
Applicant. With respect to SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant claimed that the leasing office misplaced 
the frnal payment of hrs apartment lease while Applicant was overseas, and the entered
Judgment no longer appears on his credit report. 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old communications engineer for a defense contractor. He
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant has never married, lives alone, and has no children. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 77)He
attended a vocational school between September 2008 and July 201 O and earned a
certificate of completion. (GE 3; Tr. 50, 72) He reported no military service.
Since February 2017, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (GEs 1-3)
Between March 2013 and November 2016, he worked for non-defense employers in
various jobs (interrupted by brief periods of unemployment in 2012 and 2013 and self
employment in 2014) that did not require a security clearance.
Applicant's drug history
Applicant completed an e-QIP in April 2011 and was granted a security
clearancethe same month and year. (GEs 2-3) He was asked to complete a second e-
QIP in November 2015. (GE 2) Beginning in December 2015 (one month after
completing his second e-QIP), he initiated his marijuana usage. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 67-68)
Between December 2015 and November 2016, he used marijuana with varying
frequency, but typically two to three times a month on weekends. (GE 3; Tr. 65-68, 70-
75) He did not consider himself a frequent user before experimenting with the drug in
2015-2016 with friends, and never employed his security clearance while at home using
marijuana and in deployed status. (Tr. 48, 72-73). To quell any lingering security
concerns about his using marijuana, he submitted to a voluntary drug test in 2018. (AE
B) Test results proved to be negative. (AE B)
Applicant assured he will remain committed to abstain from drug involvement and
substance misuse. (AE C) To substantiate his commitment to steer clear of illegal
drugsin the future, he confirmed his understanding "that any future involvement of
misuse will be grounds for revocation of my national security eligibility." (AE C) Applicant
accepted his responsibility to remain abstinent from all use of illegal drugs in the future.
(AE C)
Finances
Over the past seven years, Applicant accumulated two delinquent debt he
attributed, in small part, to overseas assignments. Credit reports document that in
August 2009, he co-signed with his sister for the purchase of a vehicle (for a
purchase3price of $8,605) for his mother who needed a car to get to work and back.
(GEs 3-5; Tr.94-95) Credit reports document that by October 2010, he had gotten behind
in his car payments ($297 a month) and was over 120 days delinquent in his car
payments. (GEs 3-4))  Once his delinquency reached this level of past due status, the
lender repossessed the vehicle (believed to be m 2010) and failed to notify Applicant or
3
his mother of the repossession and amount of the proceeds produced at the public
auction of the vehicle (if the car was auctioned). (GE 3; Tr. 5354) Credit  reports do not
indicate what was owing in October 2010 before the repossession of the vehicle was
completed. (GEs 3-4) They report only a balance due owed to creditor 2.a of $14,758 as
of May 2017. (GE 5; Tr. 91-92)  
Whether the 2009-financed vehicle was ever auctioned and, if so, what sale
proceeds were credited to Applicant is unclear. Correspondence posted to Applicant in
May 2018 from the assignee of the original lender who financed Applicant's purchase of
the vehicle could confirm only Applicant's purchase of the vehicle from its predecessor,
its repossession of the vehicle in May 2010, and its submission of inaccurate credit
reporting. (AE F) This assignee could neither confirm any post-repossession sale of the
vehicle or any deficiency resulting therefrom. Nor did this assignee offer any information
about any later assignment of its interest in the loan to the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 2.a.
Applicant never made any follow-up attempts to ascertain any deficiency balance from
the sale. (GE 3; Tr. 53-60, 99) Credit reports reveal that the original lender assigned its
reported deficiency balance of $14,578 to listed creditor 2.a of the SOR in May 2017.
(GEs 5-6; Tr. 100-108) The deficiency no longer appears on Applicant's most recent
credit reports of 2018. (GE 6 and AE A)
Applicant, however, never made any documented payments on the deficiency
balance covered by SOR ¶ 2.a, and simply opted to let the debt fall off his credit
report.(GE 2; Tr. 56-60) With over seven years of elapsed time since the reported
repossession of the vehicle, the most likely explanation for the debt's removal from his
credit report is the elapse of more than seven years of reporting of the debt and resulting
charge-off and time-bar of enforceable collection.
Without more information from Applicant about the details of the repossession,
disposition of the vehicle, and what monies he is still responsible for to creditor 2.a, his
liability exposure cannot be determined. Most likely, he still owes something on the
original purchase loan, even if it is not the entire reported amount of the loan. How much
is unclear, and it is Applicant's evidentiary burden to provide enough probative evidence
of the status of the loan to facilitate findings of what he currently owes the lender. His
produced documentation to date is not enough to discredit or discount the reported data
in his credit reports confirming the still outstanding balance owed to creditor 2.a
of$14,578. (GE 5 and AE F)
Besides his vehicle repossession and uncollected deficiency balance, Applicant
incurred a default judgment stemming from the vacating of his apartment in July 2010 in
anticipation of relocating without covering the last month's rent, reported to be $1,045.
(GEs 3:5; Tr. 51-53) After failed attempts to collect the rent from Applicant, creditor 2.b
filed suit  for monetary relief and later obtained a default judgment against Applicant in
November 2010 for $1,045. (GEs 3-5 and 7; Tr. 51-52) 
Applicant's claims that his check for the last month's rent to the apartment lessee
"just got lost" and was ultimately paid are not supported. by any corroborating and
substantiating evidence. (GE 3; Tr. 52) He committed to providing post-hearing proof of
4
his payment, but the evidence he providers insufficient to meet hrs evidentiary burden.
(AE E)
To date, the SOR ¶ 2.b judgment has not been satisfied or otherwise resolved
and has fallen off of Applicant's credit report. (AEs A-C and E) Applicant has made no
documented attempts to resolve his rental dispute with the judgment holder's
management, or provide any evidence of payment of the debt. (GEs A-C and E) Based
on earlier credit reports, the judgment covered by SOR ,r 2.b remains outstanding and
unresolved. (GEs 4-7)
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his supervisors and co-workers. His supervisor 
credited him with strong professional commitments in all areas he is responsible for as a
member of his intelligence team. (AE D) His lead software engineer described him as
reliable and responsible who he always trusted with completing important tasks. (AE D) 
Applicant's director of business development extolled his work ethic, character,
drive, morals, and values that he came to recognize and appreciate over the previous six
years. Although, none of Applicant's references expressed any knowledge of his
marijuana use or the state of his finances. (AE D)
                                                       Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise as security concern and
may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that
could mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG, ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the  context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant's life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. When evaluating an applicant's
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
5
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time of
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. [s]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:                                    
                                                    Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a
prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person's
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations. AG ¶ 24.
                                              Finances
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one's means,
satisfy debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also
be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible
indicator of ,other issues of personnel security concern such
as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance
misuse, or alcohol abuse of dependence. An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk6of having to engage
in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate
funds. . . . AG ¶                  
                                             
6
 Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or 
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for
asecurity clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have are
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that aapplicant may deliberately
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. "[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And, because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with th Applicant.
                                                         Analysis
Applicant is a well-regarded communications engineer who presents with a
considerable history of drug involvement and financial delinquencies. Principal security
issues in this case center on Applicant's drug involvement and his accumulation of
delinquent debts.
Drug concerns
Over a four-year period (between December 2015 and November 2016, Applicant
used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s admissions to using illegal
drugs while holding a security clearance risks of recurrence as well as judgment issues.
On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the AGs for
drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶¶ 25(a), "any substance misuse," DC  25(c), "illegal
possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 25(f), “any
7
illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive
position.” 
In Applicant's case, his significant use of marijuana over an 11-month period
spanning December 2015 through November 2016 while holding a security clearance
raises questions over the strength of his abstinence commitments. While Applicant's
material use of illegal drugs between 2015 and 2016 has never been repeated since his
acknowledged last use in November 2016 in any proven way, his drug use is still too
recent to enable safe predictions of continued abstinence. It is too soon to apply any
potential mitigating conditions to Applicant's situation. While Applicant's assurances that
his drug involvement is a thing of the past are encouraging, more time is needed to draw
safe inferences that he is not a recurrence risk.
Considering the record as a whole, there is insufficient probative evidence of
sustainable mitigation to make predictable judgments about his ability to avoid drugs and
drug purchases in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant's past marijuana use over an 11-month period
while holding a security clearance, he does not mitigate security concerns with respect to
the allegations covered by subparagraph ¶ 1.a of the SOR.
Financial concerns
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts that have not been addressed or resolved to date. Applicable
disqualifying conditions are comprised of the following: DC ¶¶ 19(b), unwillingness to
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so,” and 19©, “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that entitled
him or her to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.
Historically, evaluation of an applicant’s delinquent debts are critical to an
assessment of the applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following
rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to
holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited
disputes with his ex-wife over payment responsibilities for the listed student loan and
consumer debts afford some grounds for crediting him with extenuating circumstances.
Based on his cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” partially applies to
Applicant’s situation.
8
Since his two delinquent debts became delinquent in 2010, Applicant has made
no cognizable attempts tp address the debts. His claims that the debts no longer appear
on his most recent credit reports and have been charged off do not provide any
mitigation relief. Because the debts may no longer be enforceable, Applicant is not
relieved of his responsibility to address his creditors with good-faith payment initiatives.
Charged-off debts reflect accounting entries in credit reports. Typically, when a creditor
considers a debt to be uncollectible, it changes the debt’s status from an asset to a
charged-off account for credit reporting purposes. And, the Appeal Board has held that
the fact that some debts have dropped off his [or her] credit report is not meaningful
evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016)(citing
ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd.Aug. 25, 2015)).
Debts may be dropped from a credit report upon dispute when creditors believe
the debt is not going to be paid, a creditor fails to timely respond to a credit reporting
agency’s request for information, or when the debt has been charged off. “Mere evidence
that debts no longer appear on credit reports is not reasons to believe that they are not
legitimate or that they have been satisfactorily resolved.’ ISCR Case No. 16-02941 at
2(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017)(citing ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13,
2015))
Based on Applicant’s absence of any payment initiatives with his two listed
creditors, he may not claim any of the mitigation benefits of the “acting responsibly”
prong of MC ¶ 20(b), or claim benefits of other potentially applicable mitigating
conditions, including overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  See ISCR Case No.
15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd,
Nov. 29, 2005))
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance of
a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In
Applicant’s case, he has not addressed any potential deficiency owed from his vehicle
repossession or the entered judgment against him in 2010 (SOR debts his listed student
loan and consumer debts and resolved them with payoffs (SOR debts ¶¶ 2.a-b), or
provided any documented payment plans for resolving these debts.
Whole-person assessment
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability,
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the drug and financial issues
raised in the SOR, but the contributions he has made to his employer and the defense
industry in general.  Overall, though, Applicant’s has established insufficient probative
evidence of his overall trustworthiness and understanding of DoD policy constraints  on
the use of illegal substances to facilitate safe predictions that his is at no risk of
recurrence of illegal drug usage or that he can maintain his finances in a stable manner. 
Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a-2b.
Criterial for meeting security clearance requirements have not been met by Applicant.
9
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):                 AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:                  Against Applicant
   
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 2a-1b:                  Against Applicant
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility
to hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                               
        Roger C. Wesley
         Administrative Judge 
10
