 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-01219 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant resolved all of the debts alleged to be delinquent in his statement of 
reasons (SOR). Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. On April 8, 
2016, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA), and he unintentionally failed to disclose a $19,000 
delinquent debt on his SCA. (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992, Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 
2017. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On August 3, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a hearing. (HE 3) On September 25, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. 
On October 30, 2017, the case was assigned to another administrative judge, and on 
 
2 
                                         
 
January 24, 2018, the case was transferred to me for administrative means. On April 3, 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
setting the hearing for April 19, 2018 using video teleconference. (HE 1) Applicant waived 
any issue regarding insufficient notice of the date, time, and place for his hearing. (Tr. 13) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits; Applicant did not offer 
any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 16-17; GE 1-6) On May 3, 2018, DOHA received the hearing transcript.1 
Applicant provided eight exhibits after his hearing, which were admitted without objection. 
(Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE I) I did not receive any evidence after June 14, 2018. The 
record closed on August 3, 2018. (Tr. 42; AE I)  
  
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he denied 
the other SOR allegations. (HE 3) He also provided mitigating information. (HE 3) His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 52 years old, and he oversees the government contract department 
for a government contractor. (Tr. 5, 8; GE 1) The government contractor has employed 
him since July 2015. (Tr. 8) In 1983, Applicant graduated from high school, and in 2002, 
he received a bachelor’s degree in aeronautical science. (Tr. 5-6) He served in the Air 
Force from 1984 to 2012, and he honorably retired as a senior master sergeant (E-8). (Tr. 
6, 19-20) His Air Force specialty was air transportation. (Tr. 6) He has a 100 percent 
disability rating from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). (Tr. 7) In 1991, he married, 
and his children are ages 25, 27, 31, and 32. (Tr. 7)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s monthly VA disability pay is currently $3,300. (Tr. 24) When he retired 
from the Air Force, his monthly VA disability pay was $3,100 approved retroactively; it 
was $1,500 monthly for a time; and he began receiving $3,300 monthly in October 2014. 
(Tr. 24-25) From October 2013 to present, his annual salary has been from $75,000 to 
$83,000. (Tr. 21-22) He was unemployed for six months immediately after he retired from 
the Air Force, and he was unemployed for two months in the summer of 2015 when he 
was between jobs. (Tr. 21-22) His monthly Air Force retirement pay is $3,700. (Tr. 23) 
His spouse is a GS-12, and her annual income is about $79,000. (Tr. 37) She is also 
receiving disability pay of $1,400 from the VA. (Tr. 37-38) Their monthly take home 
income from all sources is about $15,400. (Tr. 38) He has never had financial counseling. 
(Tr. 43) 
 
                                            
1 The transcript incorrectly indicates the Administrative Judge for the hearing was Judge Murphy. 
  
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant and his spouse’s 2014, 2015, and 2016 federal income tax returns show 
adjusted gross income of $190,209, $179,820, and $196,123 respectively. (AE C-AE E) 
His adjusted gross income for each year does not include his and his spouse’s VA 
disability payments because they are tax free. His tax returns show a substantial 
deduction for unreimbursed employee expenses. (AE C-AE E)  
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts, and the record establishes the status of 
Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off credit union debt for $19,218. Applicant borrowed 
money from the credit union in 2007 to restore an antique BMW. (Tr. 25) The debt became 
delinquent in 2013 after he retired from the Air Force when Applicant was unemployed. 
(Tr. 26) Applicant said the creditor agreed for a time to freeze the account. (Tr. 28) In May 
or June 2013, he was notified that the account went to collections. (Tr. 28) The next time 
he contacted the creditor was in 2014, and he was informed the account was transferred. 
(Tr. 29) He did not make any effort to resolve the account until after receipt of the SOR. 
(Tr. 29) He received a settlement agreement from the creditor involving making monthly 
payments; however, when he tried to make a payment, the creditor said the debt was 
transferred. (Tr. 31) At the time of his hearing, he was aware that the debt could be settled 
for $16,500. (Tr. 32) Applicant said he had the funds to pay the debt, and he said he 
planned to pay it in the next few weeks. (Tr. 32, 41) On June 12, 2018, the creditor wrote 
the balance owed was $27,980. (AE B) The creditor offered to settle the debt for $16,500 
provided payment was received “within 30 days of this letter.” (AE B) On August 3, 2018, 
the creditor wrote the debt was paid in full. (AE I) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are medical debts placed for collections for $197 and $4,863. 
Applicant said the debts were supposed to be paid by TRICARE, and when TRICARE 
was informed of the debts, they were paid. (Tr. 33-34) On May 3, 2018, the creditor wrote 
that the debts were resolved, and the balance owed is zero. (AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a bank debt placed for collection for $5,074. Applicant 
purchased a television, and it ceased to function during the warranty period. (Tr. 35) He 
also used the funds to purchase an alarm system for a vehicle. (Tr. 35) On May 1, 2018, 
the law firm collecting the debt wrote that on July 28, 2017, $4,100 was received, and the 
account was settled in full. (Tr. 36; AE F) 
 
On June 13, 2018, Applicant said in an email, “My 2017 tax transcript is not 
available due to receiving an IRS approved 6-month extension. When I did my 2017 taxes 
I owed $9,000 so I am seeking professional assistance.” (AE A) His tax situation as 
presented does not raise a security concern because he and his spouse are earning 
substantial incomes and should be able to pay his taxes when his extension expires.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s April 8, 2016 SCA asks whether Applicant had any debts in the 
previous seven years placed for collection, charged off, or over 120 days delinquent. (GE 
1) Applicant answered, no, and did not disclose the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d.  
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant acknowledged that he was aware that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a met the 
reporting criteria in his SCA. (Tr. 40) Applicant said “in my haste in filling out the e-QIP     
. . . I mismarked it.” (Tr. 40) He said he did not intend to deceive the government about 
his delinquent debt. (Tr. 41) He made other errors on his SCA such as information about 
his relatives and addresses. (Tr. 41) He suggested his error might be related to his 
medical problem of “visual sight tracking” and he provided a supporting statement from a 
Professor in a Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Neurology. (Tr. 
43-44; AE G)  
 
During Applicant’s November 7, 2016 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
personal subject interview (PSI), he told the OPM investigator that in the last seven years 
he had debts in collection and debts delinquent more than 120 days. (OPM PSI at 8 (GE 
2 at 10)) When he reviewed his credit report, he discovered that several debts went to 
collections including the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. Id. at 9. He discussed his delinquent 
debts in detail during his OPM PSI.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s DD Form 214 lists the following awards: Defense Meritorious Service 
Medal; Meritorious Service Medal; Joint Service Commendation Medal; Air Force 
Commendation Medal with 4 oak leaf clusters; Joint Service Achievement Medal with 1 
oak leaf cluster; Air Force Achievement Medal; Joint Meritorious Unit Award with 3 oak 
leaf clusters; Meritorious Unit Award; AF Outstanding Unit Award with 2 oak leaf clusters; 
AF Organizational Excellence Award; AF Good Conduct Medal with 9 oak leaf clusters; 
National Defense Service Medal with 1 service star; Armed Forces Expeditionary medal; 
Southwest Asia Service Medal with 1 service star; Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary 
Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; Armed Forces Service Medal; 
Humanitarian Service Medal; Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal; AF Overseas 
Ribbon Short; AF Overseas Ribbon Long with 2 oak leaf clusters; Air Force Expeditionary 
Service Ribbon with Gold Border; AF Longevity Service with 6 oak leaf clusters; USAF 
NCO PME Graduate Ribbon with 3 oak leaf clusters; Small Arms Expert Marksmanship 
Ribbon (Pistol); and AF Training Ribbon. (AE H) He completed numerous Air Force 
training courses. (AE H)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
   
  
 
7 
                                         
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
Applicant was unemployed at times after retiring from the Air Force. His VA 
disability pay varied until he was designated 100 percent disabled. These are 
circumstances beyond his control that adversely affected his finances. He did not receive 
financial counseling. I have credited Applicant with resolution of all of the SOR debts. 
There are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved and under control.  He 
has ample financial resources, and future financial problems are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under 
all the circumstances, he established that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.4 
 
Applicant failed to disclose debts over 120 days delinquent on his April 8, 2016 
SCA in the previous seven years. Applicant knew the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was delinquent 
over 120 days when he completed his SCA.   
 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                         
 
Applicant said “in my haste in filling out the e-QIP     . . . I mismarked it.” (Tr. 40) 
He said he did not intend to deceive the government about his delinquent debt. He made 
other errors on his SCA such as information about his relatives and addresses. During 
Applicant’s November 7, 2016 OPM PSI, he told the OPM investigator that in the last 
seven years he had debts in collection and debts delinquent more than 120 days. He 
discussed his delinquent debts in detail during his OPM PSI. Applicant credibly stated he 
did not intend to deceive the government about his delinquent debt. He refuted the 
allegation that he intentionally falsified his April 8, 2016 SCA.  Personal conduct security 
concerns are not substantiated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old, and he oversees the government contract department 
for a government contractor. In 2002, he received a bachelor’s degree in aeronautical 
science. He served in the Air Force from 1984 to 2012, and he honorably retired as a 
senior master sergeant. His Air Force specialty was air transportation. He has a 100 
percent disability rating from the VA. His spouse is also receiving disability payments from 
the VA.   
 
Applicant is credited with having a generally good credit report with a solid record 
of financial responsibility. He resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR. He received 
numerous Air Force awards, and he completed numerous Air Force training courses.    
 
Applicant failed to disclose a $19,000 delinquent debt on his April 8, 2016 SCA. 
This error was unintentional. He did not intend to deceive the government about this debt. 
He disclosed the delinquent debt to the OPM investigator in his follow-up OPM PSI.   
 
10 
                                         
 
The protection of national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that 
jeopardizes security, even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. 
Applicant can be trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information related to security 
issues. He established his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated, and personal conduct 
security concerns are refuted or unsubstantiated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
