 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-03846 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 24, 2015. On 
November 13, 2017, following a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 16, 2018. On March 23, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for 
April 23, 2018. The hearing convened as scheduled. 
 
 Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, all of 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any 
exhibits. I held the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documentation. He timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
D, which were admitted without objection.1 The record closed on May 7, 2018. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j, 1.l, and 1.m. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.n, and 
1.o. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He and his wife have been married for nine years. They 
live with their two children, an 11-year-old son and a 13-year-old daughter. Applicant 
also has a 19-year-old stepson and a 22-year-old stepdaughter, his wife’s children from 
a prior marriage. His stepson lives on his own, and his stepdaughter lives with her 
grandfather. (Tr. 35, 48-49; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1993. He later attended technical school 
(2004-2005) and took some courses at a community college (2008-2010), but did not 
earn a degree. (Tr. 91-92; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant works for a defense contractor at a naval shipyard. He has had the 
same employer since May 2006, and has had no periods of unemployment. He was 
also employed in his field, with other employers, between May 2004 and May 2006. 
Applicant has never held a security clearance. A prior clearance application in about 
2011 was not adjudicated because he failed to respond to interrogatories. (Tr. 10, 80-
81; GE 1 at 30-31) 
 
 Applicant listed numerous delinquencies on his April 2015 SCA, and discussed 
them in his May 2016 background interview. (GE 1; GE 2) The SOR debts total 
$31,728.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,426); 1.b ($2,090); 1.c ($1,523); 1.d ($903); and 1.e ($449) are 
all past-due accounts placed for collection by cell phone companies. Although he 
admitted it, Applicant testified that he did not recognize SOR ¶ 1.f, a $426 debt in 
                                                          
1 AE A and AE B both relate to satisfaction of a judgment (SOR ¶ 1.n) in December 2017. AE C concerns 
satisfaction of a debt to a furniture company. AE D is a recommendation letter.  
 
 
3 
 
 
collection.2 SOR ¶ 1.g is a $397 power bill placed for collection. SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($350), 1.i 
($137), and 1.l ($732) are all past-due medical debts. SOR ¶ 1.j is a $713 past-due debt 
to a gym. SOR ¶ 1.m is a $487 past-due debt to a television company. (GE 4, 5, 6) 
Applicant has not taken action to pay these debts, and has not had recent contact with 
the creditors. He testified that he planned to pay them within the month. (Tr. 44, 70-71, 
73-80) 
 
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.n, a $2,999 judgment entered against him in 2015, in 
favor of a landlord. The debt was satisfied in December 2017. (Tr. 41-42, 67-69; AE A; 
AE B).  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o, which Applicant also denied, is a $4,597 judgment, initially owed to a 
furniture company. Applicant testified that the debt had been paid through garnishment 
of his wages. He paid $185 a month on the debt from March 2014 to March 2018, and 
that the debt is now paid in full. (Tr. 42-44; AE C) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k is a $16,199 debt placed in collection by a bank. In about 2003 or 
2004, Applicant co-signed a car loan for a friend. (Tr. 38) For a time, he was responsible 
for the monthly payments. At some point, his friend’s brother needed a car, so Applicant 
turned the car over to his friend for her brother to use. The car was later repossessed. 
Applicant denied the debt because he believed the account had been resolved by his 
friend or her brother. (Tr. 36-41, 64-68) The debt is listed on his 2011 credit report (GE 
3 at 11) as a “joint contractual liability.” It is listed on later credit reports under a 
successor creditor. The account has been closed, with a zero balance. (GE 4 at 3; GE 5 
at 2; GE 6 at 3) SOR debt ¶ 1.k is therefore resolved, since it is not a current debt.  
 
 Applicant testified that he began experiencing financial difficulties after his wife 
quit her job at the shipyard to pursue a nursing degree. She was in school full time from 
2011 to 2015. She did not work during this period, leaving Applicant as the sole 
breadwinner in the household. They paid for nursing school largely through financial aid 
programs. (Tr. 28-32, 49-50, 54)  
 
In addition, Applicant’s parents became ill during this period, and he provided 
them financial assistance by paying some of their everyday expenses, such as power 
and rent. Applicant had a plan in place to pay his debts, but it “kind of fell apart” when 
his parents needed help financially. (Tr. 31) They are now more financially stable, 
though they are both retired and on a fixed income. (Tr. 28, 31, 50-52) Applicant’s 
stepson also had disciplinary and behavioral issues in his teenage years, which caused 
friction and conflict in the household. He is now 19, and out of the house. (Tr. 50-51)  
 
For a while, Applicant was just “playing catch up” with his debts. (Tr. 44-45) He 
also acknowledged some overspending, particularly with the numerous cell phone bills 
alleged. (Tr. 73-75) Applicant consulted a lawyer, who advised putting together a “game 
plan” of paying down his debts, and cutting down on expenses. Applicant did not 
                                                          
2 Tr. 75-76. SOR ¶ 1.f is listed on GE 5 & GE 6.  
 
4 
 
 
indicate that he received any more specific advice. (Tr. 46-47) From about November 
2016 to November 2017, Applicant and his family moved in with his wife’s father as a 
way to cut down on expenses. (Tr. 45) 
 
Applicant’s wife earned her nursing degree in 2015. She now works full time as a 
nurse. She earns about $1,800 to $2,000 every two weeks. (Tr. 33) Applicant’s salary 
has increased, from about $60,000 in 2011 to about $82,000 today. (Tr. 32, 56) As a 
result, Applicant’s finances have improved in recent years. Applicant has a $428 
monthly car payment on a 2006 vehicle. He pays $1,000 a month in rent. He has no 
credit cards. (Tr. 45, 63-64) Applicant characterized his current finances as stable. He is 
able to pay regular household expenses, but is not yet able to address his debts, though 
he intends to do so soon. “We are just getting to the point where . . . we are financially 
stable and able to take care of these things.” (Tr. 61) Applicant planned to use an 
expected significant tax refund to pay some of his debts. (Tr. 56-59)   
 
 A lifelong friend of Applicant’s provided a recommendation letter. He attested to 
Applicant’s strong family values and work ethic, and noted that Applicant has overcome 
many obstacles. Applicant is trustworthy and dependable, and has excellent character. 
(AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
5 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant incurred numerous unresolved delinquent debts over the last several 
years. This is due to a variety of circumstances, including his wife’s decision to stop 
working while pursuing a nursing degree. Applicant also provided financial assistance to 
his parents in time of need. This impacted his own finances. Applicant also 
acknowledged some overspending. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
resolved or is under control.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k, a $16,000 auto debt, accounts for about half of the total SOR debt 
alleged. The account is closed, with no balance due. SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o, two debts 
totaling almost $7,600, have also been paid, though both are judgments, and one was 
paid by garnishment. This leaves less than $8,000 in unresolved delinquent debt. 
Three-quarters of the debt alleged in the SOR is therefore paid or otherwise resolved.  
 
 Applicant’s wife decided to stop work while pursuing her nursing degree. This 
impacted the family’s finances significantly, since Applicant was the sole breadwinner 
for the four years she was in school. While this was not entirely a condition beyond their 
control, it was also a reasonable decision under the circumstances. The fact that some 
financial issues resulted is not surprising, because other unexpected things happened in 
that timeframe. For instance, Applicant’s parents needed financial help.  
 
 Applicant pursued financial counseling from an attorney, and he received general 
advice that he could improve his finances by paying down his debts and limiting his 
expenses. He and his wife moved in with her father for a year. She earned her nursing 
degree, and now works full time in her new profession. This has increased their income 
and put them in a position where they are better able to pay their debts. Applicant 
testified that it has taken some time to stabilize his finances. He testified that he 
intended to resolve his remaining debts within a month after the hearing by using his 
expected tax refund. While it will likely take more time than that, his delinquencies are 
now significantly less than what was alleged. Multiple large SOR debts are resolved. 
While several others remain, an applicant is not expected to resolve all of his SOR 
debts, or to pay them off in any particular way, as long as he has a reasonable path 
forward. Particularly given the fact that Applicant’s wife is once again fully employed, the 
debts are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also observed Applicant’s demeanor 
at his hearing. He was polite, well-dressed, and respectful. He took the proceedings 
seriously. He testified credibly that he intends to continue resolving his debts, and he 
set forth a reasonable plan for doing so. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
     
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
