 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00187 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 19, 2016. 
On March 14, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 30, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 21, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018. On April 16, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 23, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence, 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
G, which were admitted without objection. I appended to the record the Government’s 
Exhibit List as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s request for administrative 
notice of relevant facts about Afghanistan and Iran, as HE II and III, respectively. I left 
the record open until June 25, 2018. Applicant timely provided additional documents 
that were admitted into evidence as AE H and I, without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 8, 2018. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG because they were in 
effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have been 
the same under either version. 
 
Procedural Matters3 
 
 At the hearing, the Government amended the SOR, without objection from the 
Applicant. It withdrew the Guideline C allegations under paragraph 2, and added an 
additional Guideline B allegation under paragraph 1 to conform to new information 
disclosed by Applicant at the hearing, as follows: 
 
 g. Your fiancée is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.  
 
 Applicant was offered several different options to afford him additional time to 
respond to the new Guideline B allegation, including stopping the hearing that day and 
reconvening on a different date, or continuing with the hearing that day and leaving the 
record open until a later date. Applicant opted to immediately respond to the allegation 
and proceed with the hearing. He admitted the allegation, and advised that he did not 
need the record to be left open. I, sua sponte, left the record open to give Applicant the 
opportunity to provide an update regarding his fiancée’s visa application and relocation 
to the United States. 
  
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Tr. at p. 6-8, 11-12, 47-50, 93-94. 
 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant, age 31, has never been married nor has any children. He was enrolled 
in a U.S. community college from 2009 through 2010 studying criminal justice, but did 
not earn a degree. He has been employed as a security officer by a U.S. defense 
contractor since 2015. Before that, he served the U.S. military in Afghanistan from 2003 
through 2008, and from 2010 through 2014, primarily as a combat linguist. This is his 
first application for a security clearance.5 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2008 via a special immigrant visa, 
which he was granted because of his work as a combat linguist. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen upon his own application in 2014. He does not maintain 
citizenship with Afghanistan.6  
 
Applicant’s has three siblings. His parents are deceased. His brother and sister-
in-law are citizens of Afghanistan residing in the United States (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c). 
One sister (Sister 1) resides with her husband in Iran, who are both citizens of 
Afghanistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d). His other sister (Sister 2) is a citizen and resident of 
the Netherlands. In August 2017, Applicant became engaged to a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.g). Neither his fiancée, siblings, nor in-laws have or had any 
employment ties to the Afghan or Iranian governments.7  
 
Applicant’s brother, age 28, works in the automotive industry. He immigrated with 
his wife to the United States in 2014, also via a special immigrant visa because of his 
work as a combat linguist for the U.S. Military. His wife is a full-time student. He and his 
wife own a home in the United States, where they reside with their three minor children. 
Applicant’s brother and each member of his family are permanent U.S. residents and 
intend to become U.S. citizens at the earliest opportunity. They have already begun the 
process. Applicant has contact (either in person, by text message, or by phone) with his 
brother a few times per week.8 
 
Sister 1, age 45, is a tailor. She has resided with her husband in Iran for 
approximately 10 to 15 years. Applicant has contact with her via email or social media 
about once per quarter, most recently in approximately March or April 2018. He last had 
in-person contact with her in 2014, when she returned to Afghanistan to reunite with 
Applicant and their brother. His sister has never visited Applicant in the United States, 
nor has he ever visited her in Iran. Applicant’s last had contact with Sister 1’s husband 
                                                          
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer, his SCA (GE 1), and the summary of his two 2016 subject interviews (AE A).  
 
5 Tr. at 6-8, 40, 70-77, 87. 
 
6 AE D; Tr. at 39-40, 71, 81-82. 
 
7 Tr. at 46, 58-59, 61, 66. 
 
8 Tr. at 38, 52-59, 61, 82-83, 86-87. 
 
 
4 
 
when Applicant “was a child.” Sister 1’s husband did not accompany her to Afghanistan 
in 2014.9 
 
Applicant’s fiancée, age 25, has imminent plans to relocate to the United States, 
where she intends to permanently reside with Applicant. Until then, she resides with her 
parents in Afghanistan. Applicant and his fiancée will marry once she arrives, at which 
time she will become a permanent U.S. resident and eventually apply for U.S. 
citizenship. Her fiancée visa, which had been pending since November 2017, was 
approved by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigrations Services (USCIS) in May 2018. In 
June 2018, USCIS forwarded the petition to the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan to initiate 
the transfer process. Applicant communicates with his fiancée, by either text messages 
or phone calls, approximately two or three times per week. He does not provide any 
financial support to his fiancée.10 
 
Applicant has known his fiancée and her family since childhood. His fiancée’s 
parents and her two sisters are also citizens and residents of Afghanistan. During his 
August 2017 visit, he had contact only with his fiancée’s parents and one of her sisters. 
He has not had any contact with his fiancée’s family since that visit. His fiancée’s 
parents will “probably” relocate to the United States sometime in the future, but 
Applicant did not have “any specifics” about those plans.11 
 
Although Applicant has other extended family who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan, he does not maintain close or continuing contact with them. He has 
infrequent contact via social media only with his (about ten) cousins. When they 
message to “check on” him, Applicant responds. He otherwise avoids “talking to a lot of 
people in Afghanistan” to eliminate the risk to his security clearance. He does not have 
contact with any friends who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.12 
 
Applicant last visited Afghanistan in August 2017 (for ten days) in order to get 
engaged to his fiancée. His brother and sister-in-law accompanied him on that trip, but 
stayed for a longer period. He and his brother stayed with his fiancée’s family, and his 
sister-in-law stayed with her own family (parents, brother, and sister), who are all 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His prior visit to Afghanistan was in approximately 
July 2014 (for about one month). On that visit, he stayed with his brother, who lived 
there at the time.13   
 
Applicant owns a “small portion of [undeveloped] land” in Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 
1.f). His mother purchased the land, as an investment, for approximately $1,000. He 
                                                          
9  Tr. at 59-66. 
 
10 AE H and I; Tr. at 46-47, 50, 68-69, 88, 92. 
 
11 Tr. at 50-51, 67-68. 
 
12 Tr. at 66-69, 84-88. 
 
13 Tr. at 45-46, 51-52, 56-57. 
 
 
5 
 
has never seen the land nor has any idea of its current worth or whether it is titled in his 
name. He estimates it to be just two to three percent of his overall asset portfolio, which 
is not significant to him. While he is willing to liquidate it, he does not intend to do so 
because of the risks involved. He maintains all of his other assets in the United States, 
including his residence (purchased in 2013) and bank accounts (currently valued at 
$20,000). He derives his income solely from his annual salary of approximately $52,000 
to $55,000.14 
 
Applicant saw direct combat while serving the U.S. military in Afghanistan. He 
took direct fire, indirect fire, and mortar and rocket fire, including from air strikes. On one 
mission, while riding in a MATV (Mine Resistant Ambush Protected All-Terrain Vehicle), 
bullets hit the hatch where he was sitting. His combat time totaled approximately three 
years: a year between 2011 and 2012, and two years between 2004 and 2008. In 
addition to serving as a linguist, Applicant also worked with an advisory team training 
Afghan officers at high levels.15 
 
Applicant served as the personal linguist in Afghanistan for one U.S. Marine 
Corps captain who wrote a recommendation of the “strongest endorsement.” Applicant 
was “crucial” and “instrumental” to the captain’s communications with, and cultural 
awareness of, his Afghan counterparts. Applicant “never hesitated to follow [the U.S. 
Marines whom he served] into direct fire engagements with the enemy,” and “could be 
counted on to operate in the most austere conditions.” Applicant was “one of the most 
professional linguists” with whom the captain had engaged during his five combat 
deployments. Applicant possessed the “rare qualities” most sought after for linguists 
and “set the standards high for his peers.”16 
 
A U.S. Army lieutenant colonel who was the commanding officer of a task force 
that Applicant served in Afghanistan wrote a letter of appreciation. Applicant played a 
“vital” and “integral” role in the overall success of the task force. He “always displayed a 
high degree of integrity, responsibility and ambition.” He provided excellent 
communication and translation service and was well respected by the command group, 
his peers, and leaders of the Afghan National Army (ANA). Leadership consistently 
requested him by name. After seeing a need for awareness of Afghan and Western 
cultures, Applicant organized several events to bring local workers on the base and 
coalition forces together.  
 
A retired U.S. Marine Corps sergeant and close friend wrote a letter to praise 
Applicant’s character and integrity. He was an infantry squad leader who served with 
Applicant in Afghanistan. Applicant was “dedicated, hardworking, driven and motivated 
to do his very best.” He was “always the first one of the translators to volunteer and 
even went so far as to volunteer for dangerous missions.” He was “there on the front 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 16, 40-45. 
 
15 AE B and G; Tr. at 69-78. 
 
16 AE B. 
 
 
6 
 
lines, in the most dangerous positions, letting us know what was going on and if 
anything was amiss.”17 
 
A U.S. Marine Corps lieutenant colonel who as the commanding officer of a 
battalion Applicant served in Afghanistan presented him with a certificate of 
commendation for his performance as a linguist between 2011 and 2012. Applicant 
spent “countless hours” instructing language and culture, and serving as a “masterful 
translator” between the ANA and Marine Corps leadership. Applicant’s “intelligence, 
keen insight into Afghan-American relations, thorough understanding of the mission, 
ability to clearly articulate the spoken and unspoken nuances between English and Dari 
speakers, and commitment to the success of the Marines and ANA soldiers alike 
[]contributed to the battalion’s success in immeasurable ways.” Applicant’s “outstanding 
motivation and dedication to duty reflected credit upon him and were in keeping with the 
highest traditions of the Marine Corps.”18 
 
A U.S. Army commander of a military police battalion that Applicant served in 
Afghanistan conferred a certificate of appreciation for his performance as a linguist. 
Applicant “assisted in the successful development of a rapport which expedited the 
efficient transition of training for the ANA.” His service was “invaluable.” 19 
 
A good friend and colleague of Applicant in his current position deemed 
“noteworthy” Applicant’s “patriotism, honesty, and abiding love of all things American.” 
Applicant is “the most conscientious, adept, and professional [security officer]” that the 
friend has ever come into contact.20  
 
At the hearing, Applicant stated:   
 
I would like to reemphasize that I take a lot of pride in being an American, 
Your Honor. I earned it with my life. I risked my life to become an 
American citizen, and this is all I have. I don't consider myself anything but 
an American. That's why I moved here.21 
 
 
  
                                                          
17 AE B.  
 
18 AE B.  
 
19 AE B.  
 
20 AE B.  
 
21 Tr. at 73. 
 
 
7 
 
Administrative Notice (Afghanistan) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Afghanistan, as outlined in HE II and HE IV, and the documents appended 
thereto,22 including the following: 
 
 Afghanistan remains an important partner of the United States in the fight 
against terrorism, working with the United States to eliminate al-Qaeda, 
ISIS-Khorasan (ISIS-K) and their affiliates in Afghanistan.23 
 
 U.S. citizens are warned against travel to Afghanistan due to crime, 
terrorism, civil unrest, and armed conflict. Travel to all areas of 
Afghanistan is unsafe because of high levels of kidnappings, hostage 
taking, suicide bombings, widespread military combat operations, 
landmines, and terrorist and insurgent attacks, including attacks using 
vehicle-borne or other improvised-explosive devices (IEDs), suicide vests, 
and grenades. Terrorist groups continue plotting possible attacks in 
Afghanistan.24  
 
 Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks 
by the Afghan Taliban, including the affiliated Haqqani Network (HQN) and 
other insurgent and terrorist groups. ISIS-K conducted a number of high-
profile attacks during the second half of 2016. Insurgents across 
Afghanistan used a variety of tactics to expand their territorial influence, 
disrupt governance, and create a public perception of instability. According 
to Afghan National Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) statistics, 
ANDSF casualties were 30 percent higher in 2016 than in 2015. 
Insurgents continued to use large vehicle-borne improvised-explosive 
devices (VBIED) and complex attacks involving multiple attackers laden 
with suicide vests working in teams to target ANDSF, Afghan government 
buildings, foreign governments, and soft civilian targets to include 
international organizations.25 
 
                                                          
22 The source documents for certain facts cited in the Administrative Notice have been updated. I 
appended to the record the relevant portions of those updated source documents, collectively, as HE IV, 
and have provided the updated website addresses in the footnote citations below. I have considered the 
both the original and updated source documents, which cite facts that do not materially differ. My decision 
would have been the same in light of either set of facts. 
 
23 HE IV: Item VI, updated July 26, 2018. 
https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/5380.htm 
 
24 HE IV: Item I, updated July 9, 2018. 
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/traveladvisories/afghanistan-advisory.html 
 
25 HE II: Item II. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 Afghanistan faces a continuing threat from an externally supported 
insurgency and the highest regional concentration of terrorist groups in the 
world.26 
 
 The most significant human-rights issues in Afghanistan include 
extrajudicial killings by security forces; disappearances, torture; arbitrary 
arrest; detention, including of women accused of so-called moral crimes; 
and sexual abuse of children by security force members. Widespread 
disregard for the rule of law and official impunity for those who committed 
human rights abuses were serious problems. The government did not 
consistently or effectively prosecute abuses by officials, including security 
forces. There were major attacks on civilians by armed insurgent groups 
and targeted assassination.27 
 
Administrative Notice (Iran) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Iraq, as outlined in HE III and HE V, and the documents appended thereto,28 
including the following: 
 
 The United States and Iran do not have diplomatic relations.29 
 
 U.S. citizens are warned against travel to Iran due to the risk of arbitrary 
arrest and detention of U.S. citizens. Iranian authorities unjustly detain and 
imprison U.S. citizens, including students, journalists, business travelers, 
and academics, on charges including espionage and posing a threat to 
national security. Consular access to detained U.S. citizens is often 
denied.30 
 
                                                          
26 HE IV: Item IV, updated June 2018. 
https://media.defense.gov/2018/Jul/03/2001938620/-1/-1/1/1225-REPORT-JUNE-2018-FINAL-
UNCLASS-BASE.PDF 
 
27 HE IV: Item IV, updated on a day in 2018 that is not specified in the record. 
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/277519.pdf 
 
28 The source documents for certain facts cited in the Administrative Notice have been updated. I 
appended to the record the relevant portions of those updated source documents, collectively, as HE V, 
and have provided the updated website addresses in the footnote citations below. I have considered the 
both the original and updated source documents, which cite facts that do not materially differ. My decision 
would have been the same in light of either set of facts. 
 
29 HE V: Item III, updated July 2, 2018. 
https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/5314.htm 
 
30 HE V: Item VI, updated January 10, 2018.  
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/traveladvisories/iran-travel-advisory.html 
 
 
 
9 
 
 U.S. Government economic sanctions prohibit most economic activity 
between U.S. citizens and Iran.31 
 
 Iran is among the top four countries that pose the greatest cyber threats to 
the United States. The use of cyberattacks as a foreign policy tool outside 
of military conflict has been mostly limited to sporadic lower-level attacks. 
However, Iran is one of three countries testing more aggressive 
cyberattacks that pose growing threats to the United States and US 
partners. Iran will continue working to penetrate US and Allied networks 
for espionage and to position itself for potential future cyberattacks.32 
 
 Iran and its strategic partner Lebanese Hizballah pose a persistent threat 
to the United States and its partners worldwide. Iran remains the most 
prominent state sponsor of terrorism, providing financial aid, advanced 
weapons and tactics, and direction to militant and terrorist groups across 
the Middle East and cultivating a network of operatives across the globe 
as a contingency to enable potential terrorist attacks. Lebanese Hizballah 
has demonstrated its intent to foment regional instability by deploying 
thousands of fighters to Syria and by providing weapons, tactics, and 
direction to militant and terrorist groups. Hizballah probably also 
emphasizes its capability to attack US, Israeli, and Saudi Arabian 
interests.33 
 
 Iran’s support for the Popular Mobilization Committee (PMC) and Shia 
militants remains the primary threat to US personnel in Iraq. We assess 
that this threat will increase as the threat from ISIS recedes, especially 
given calls from some Iranian-backed groups for the United States to 
withdraw and growing tension between Iran and the United States. Iran 
continues to develop and improve a range of new military capabilities to 
target US and allied military assets in the region.34 
 
 The most significant human rights issues in Iran include: a high number of 
executions for crimes not meeting the international legal standard of “most 
serious crimes” and without fair trials of individuals, including juvenile 
offenders; disappearances by government agents; torture; arbitrary 
detention and imprisonment; severe restrictions on freedom of expression, 
including criminalization of libel and suppression of virtually all expression 
                                                          
31 HE V: Item VII, updated May 23, 2018. 
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/international-travel/International-Travel-Country-Information-
Pages/Iran.html 
 
32 HE V: Item II, updated February 13, 2018. 
 https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Testimonies/2018-ATA---Unclassified-SSCI.pdf 
 
33 HE V: Item II. 
 
34 HE V: Item II. 
 
 
10 
 
deemed critical of the regime or its officials; severe restrictions on the 
press, including imprisonment of reporters, and of the internet which the 
government disrupted and censored; severe restrictions on the rights of 
assembly and association to block any activity it deemed “anti-regime”, 
egregious restrictions on religious freedom; elections where the regime 
pre-selected the candidates and that otherwise did not meet international 
standards and severely limited political participation; and pervasive 
government corruption in all branches and at all levels of government. The 
Iranian government took few steps to investigate, prosecute, punish, or 
otherwise hold accountable officials who committed these abuses, many 
of which were perpetrated as a matter of government policy. Impunity 
remained pervasive throughout all levels of the government and security 
forces. Iran materially contributed to human rights abuses in Syria, 
through its military support for Syrian president Bashar al-Assad and for 
Hizballah forces there, as well as in Iraq, through its aid to certain Iraqi 
Shia militia groups.35 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”36 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”37 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”38 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
35 HE V: Item VIII, updated on a day in 2018 that is not specified in the record. 
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/277485.pdf 
 
36 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
37 Egan at 527. 
 
38 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
11 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.40 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”41 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.42 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.43 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.44 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”45 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”46 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
                                                          
39 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
40 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
41 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
42 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
43 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
44 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
45 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
46 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
12 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s ties to Sister 1 and Sister 1’s husband, who are Afghan citizens 
residing in Iran, and to his fiancée, who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, 
establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). A heightened risk is associated with the Afghan 
government given the significant terrorism and human-rights problems existent there; 
and with the Iranian government because of its persistent threat to the United States as 
a sponsor of terrorism, its espionage and cyberattacks against the United States, and its 
serious human-rights violations. The Government did not establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
with respect to Applicant’s ties to his brother and sister-in-law, who are permanent 
residents of the United States, or to any other relative or friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. The Government did not establish AG ¶ 7(e) as to the land 
Applicant owns in Afghanistan. 
 
The following are potentially relevant mitigating conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
13 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is established as to Applicant’s brother-in-law since they have not had 
contact since Applicant was a child. Given the heightened risk associated with Iran and 
Afghanistan, Applicant’s ties to his fiancée and Sister 1 raise concerns that Applicant 
could be placed in a position of having to choose between their interests and that of the 
United States. However, those concerns are outweighed by Applicant’s demonstrable 
loyalty to the United States.  
 
Applicant chose to make the United States his permanent home nearly ten years 
ago. Both before and after immigrating to the United States, he served the U.S. military 
in Afghanistan for a total of nine years, with distinction and at great risk to his safety. 
Applicant’s significant financial interests are in the United States, including the 
residence that he has owned since 2013. His future plans involve his fiancée’s imminent 
relocation to the United States, their marriage, and her naturalization as a U.S. citizen. 
Accordingly, Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest with respect to 
Afghanistan or Iran in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is established as to 
Applicant’s fiancée and Sister 1. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
14 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) and the personal sacrifice and 
loyalty associated with Applicant’s distinguished service as a combat linguist. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person and the heightened risk associated 
with Afghanistan and Iran, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence 
concerns. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  WITHDRAWN 
 
Subparagraph 2.a: Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
