 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02021 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
08/06/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 
2018, scheduling the hearing for June 19, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented Exhibit (AE) A-B, a packet of 
 
2 
 
documents. I held the record open until July 16, 2018, for additional documentation. 
Applicant presented a packet of documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) C 
and admitted into the record without objection or comment. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 43, is engaged. He has two daughters. He graduated from high 
school in 1993, and served in the United States Army from 1993 until 2004. He received 
an honorable discharge. Applicant has attended some college courses, but he has not 
obtained his degree. He has been employed with his current employer since 2004. As a 
contractor, Applicant served in Iraq. Applicant completed his security clearance 
application on May 29, 2016. He has held a security clearance for 25 years. (GE 1)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has delinquent debt in the amount of $34,000, 
which includes a past-due mortgage amount of $24,033 and in foreclosure status, a 
charged-off account, a medical account, and another charged-off account. Applicant 
admitted all the allegations, but explained three accounts were paid. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial hardship. He stated that he has lived with his 
girlfriend for about 14 years. When she became ill and could not work due to a medical 
condition, Applicant lost the dual income. (GE 4) In 2014, Applicant was diagnosed with 
an illness and medical bills accumulated. His required move to another state for 
employment caused the mortgage issue.  
 
As to SOR 1.a, mortgage loan with a balance of $174,471 past due in the 
approximate amount of $24,033, and in foreclosure status, Applicant owned a home in 
state T and lived there from 2009 to 2012. For employment, he was required to move to 
another state. Applicant received no financial assistance from his employer. He intended 
to return to that home, in the interim, he rented the home to a friend who paid the mortgage 
to the mortgage company directly. His friend lost his job and could not maintain the 
payments. (Tr. 20) When Applicant learned about his friend’s inability to pay the 
mortgage, it was already in arrears. Applicant made payments on both his own rent in 
state M and the mortgage until 2014. (GE 4) Applicant submitted proof that he made a 
partial payment to the lender in 2015, which was returned. (AE C ) Applicant contacted 
the bank and he was told to enroll in a program that would help him. Applicant completed 
the paperwork, but he did not qualify for the program. He sent small amounts of money 
to the bank, but the checks were returned because the amounts were not sufficient. (Tr. 
21; AE A)  Since the home was acquired through the VA, Applicant contacted them. He 
claims that it was too late because the mortgage company had already sold the house. 
(Tr. 21). 
 
According to GE 2 the home foreclosed in  about 2014. Applicant submitted a post-
hearing submission that proved he asked for a hardship loan from his 401(k). He also 
submitted a form that showed he had sufficient money in his account at the time to pay 
the lender. (AE C) He was willing to pay any past-due amount. Another document from 
the mortgage lender shows a zero balance for an unpaid principal balance for a property 
 
3 
 
in Texas. (AX C) At the hearing Applicant stated that he would pay the past-due amount. 
It is unclear from the record if there is any deficiency balance. However, Applicant had 
sufficient money to pay any deficiency if there was one. 
 
SOR 1.b, is an account that is in repayment status according to Applicant. The 
original balance was $8,282, but Applicant states that the current balance is $2,932. (AE) 
B.  
 
As to SOR 1.c, a medical account in the amount of $2,100 is a hospital bill. 
Applicant fell ill and was taken to the hospital and diagnosed with adult-onset diabetes. 
Applicant submitted documentation that he has no account in collection. (AE C) 
 
SOR 1.d is a past-due account in the amount of $165. Applicant provided proof 
that the account was paid in in 2016. (AE C) The account was for a dental visit.   
 
Applicant earns about $93,000 a year. His partner contributes about $2,600 a 
month to household expenses. He has a savings account and no other delinquent bills. 
He is current on everyday household expenses. He has no car loans. (Tr. 48) He is current 
on child support payments.  
 
Applicant submitted four character letters from various people who have known 
him. His previous supervisor has known him for 16 years and attests to his trustworthiness 
with classified information. A military colleague who has known him for 13 years states 
that he has never known Applicant to live above his means. He is loyal to the United 
States and has demonstrated over the years that he can protect classified information.  
Two personal friends who have known Applicant for about 35 years speak to his excellent 
character and sense of responsibility. (AE A) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
 
5 
 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”),  and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are the result of loss of income from his partner, medical issues 
and a required move to another state for employment. AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
Applicant’s largest debt was the result of the home foreclosure when he had to move for 
work and when the renter could no longer pay the mortgage. The intent was to return to 
the home. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s medical issues and foreclosure were beyond 
his control. He acted responsibly to address the resulting debts. He provided 
documentation that he did everything possible to pay the past-due amount on the 
mortgage  to stop a foreclosure. He did not ignore the issue.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. AG 20(d) is established. Applicant’s current financial 
situation is under control.  He has a track record of payments of many non SOR accounts.  
He resolved his SOR financial issues. Three are paid and one is in a repayment plan. He 
provided sufficient documentation to support mitigation. His good-faith efforts are clear. I 
believe he will continue. He has a track record of responsibility. Based on the record, it is 
 
6 
 
unclear if there is any deficiency balance, but Applicant stands willing and able to pay the 
amount.   
 
Applicant met his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR. For 
these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. for Applicant. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his years of service in the military, his excellent references, 
and his many years of holding a security clearance without incidence, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. 
Accordingly, Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
     Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
