 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01660 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate financial consideration 
security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) On March 9, 2017, and March 15, 2017, 
Applicant provided a personal subject interview (PSI) to a security investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management. (OPM) After reviewing the background investigation 
and the summary of the PSI, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.1 On September 11, 2017, 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
                                                          
1 In the response to the interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged that the summary of the PSI was 
accurate and true.  
 
2 
 
 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
On November 13, 2017, Applicant responded to interrogatories sent to her by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). In her response to the interrogatories, 
Applicant also adopted as accurate the PSI summary. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2017. She admitted four of the 
debts (SOR 1.a, 1.f, 1.h and 1.i); denied four debts (SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e); and could 
not admit or deny one debt since she had no information about the debt (SOR 1.g). She 
requested that the matter be decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on December 28, 2017. (Item 7) 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 9, 2018, and 
she was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant provided a response to the 
FORM that was received at DOHA on February 2, 2018. (Item 8) Department Counsel 
had no objection to consideration of the material. (Item 9) I was assigned the case on 
April 13, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 59 years old. She graduated from high school in June 1977. She has been 
a mechanical engineering technician for a defense contractor since June 2005. She 
married in July 1979 and has two adult children. She received her first clearance for 
access to classified information in January 1988. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated January 20, 
2016) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that she did not timely file her federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2016. (SOR 1.a) The SOR alleges and 
credit reports (Item 5, dated April 21, 2017; Item 6, dated February 12, 2016) confirm 
that Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $14,576 for past-due federal 
income taxes (SOR 1.b); and a state $4,683 for past-due income taxes (SOR 1.c). The 
SOR also alleges Applicant has a past-due mortgage of $11,134 on a balance of 
$132,296 (SOR 1.d); a charged-off credit card debt of $1,335 (SOR 1.e); a debt in 
collection for $127 (SOR 1.f); a judgment for a computer equipment purchase for $328 
(SOR 1.g); a traffic ticket in collection for $200 (SOR 1.h); and a debt in collection for 
$127 (SOR 1.i) to the same creditor as listed for the debt at SOR 1.f. Applicant claims 
that the $127 debts at SOR 1.f and 1.i are duplicates. I find that this is the same debt as 
SOR 1.f, so SOR 1.i is found for Applicant. The total amount of the non-tax debts is 
$2,106. (Item 2, Response to SOR, dated November 13, 2017) 
 
 Applicant admitted on her e-QIP, in the PSI, and in her response to the SOR that 
she failed to timely file her federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2016. 
She attribute her failure to timely file the tax returns to not having the funds to pay the 
taxes due. She stated on the e-QIP that she did not know that she could negotiate a 
 
3 
 
 
payment plan with the IRS or request a tax return filing extension. IRS tax transcripts 
provided by Applicant with her response to the SOR, reveal that she filed her 2009 and 
2010 tax return on October 15, 2012; her 2011 tax return on July 11, 2017; her tax year 
2012 tax return on December 9, 2015; and her tax years 2013 and 2014 tax returns on 
December 11, 2015. She stated that the tax year 2015 federal tax return was filed 
electronically but was rejected. She filed a paper tax return for tax year 2015 on July 29, 
2017. Applicant provided copies of the tax return forms which show that she owes about 
$1,228 in federal income taxes for tax year 2015. She provided documentation that she 
filed her tax year 2016 tax return late on July 3, 2017. (Item 4, pp. 15-30) 
 
 On August 31, 2017, Applicant reached a tax payment plan for past taxes with 
the IRS by payment of $225 per month. Her first payment to the IRS was due on 
September 15, 2017. Applicant did not present information showing payments made 
under the plan. (Item 4, pp. 13-14) 
 
 The information provided by Applicant indicates that she also filed her state 
income tax returns late for tax years 2009 to 2016. She filed the state returns in August 
2017. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided information that her state income 
tax debt has been resolved as of August 29, 2017 by a payment of $357.82. (Item 4, pp. 
32-50; Item 9, Response to FORM, State Department of Revenue Letter, dated August 
29, 2017) 
 
 Applicant reached a payment plan with her mortgage company to bring her 
mortgage current. (Item 4, at pp. 51-52) She claims that she is making timely payments 
under the plan and her mortgage will be current as of December 2017. Applicant did not 
present any information concerning payments made on the mortgage or the status of 
her mortgage account. The account is still listed as past due on the credit reports. 
(Items 5 and 6) SOR 1.d is resolved against Applicant. 
 
 Applicant denies that she has a credit card debt. (SOR 1.e) In her response to 
the SOR, Applicant claims she would have the debt removed from her credit report.  
The credit reports show that a settlement was accepted and the account closed. (Item 5 
and 6) The debt is resolved for Applicant.  
 
 The debt at SOR 1.f and 1.i are duplicate debts to a water delivery company. 
Applicant claims the debt to the water delivery company was paid, but she did not 
provided any documents that the debt is paid or resolved. The credit reports list this 
debt as still unresolved. SOR 1.i as a duplicate debt is resolved for Applicant, but SOR 
1.f is resolved against Applicant. 
 
 Applicant reports that she has no knowledge of the judgment on a debt for 
computer equipment. (SOR 1.g) She contacted the creditor and was told that the 
account was closed 13 years ago. However, it is still listed as unsatisfied on credit 
reports. (Item 6) Applicant did not present any information concerning payment of the 
debt. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to show that the debt is 
resolved.  
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant admits to the traffic camera ticket debt. (SOR 1.h) She believes that the 
ticket was paid. She did not present any proof of payment. This debt is still listed on the 
credit reports. (Item 6) It is not resolved.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial 
obligations. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage 
his or her finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in her responses to the SOR and the interrogatories 
establish that she failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2009 and 2016. This led to delinquent federal and state taxes. Information contained in 
credit reports establishes the delinquent mortgage, credit card, and other debts noted in 
the SOR. The evidence of record is sufficient to raise the following Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant’s tax debts caused by her failure to timely file federal and state tax 
returns for 2009 through 2016, and her failure to resolve other debts exhibits an inability 
and unwillingness to satisfy debts and meet her financial obligations. Once the 
Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the 
responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The information provided by Applicant in 
response to the SOR and the FORM shows that the tax debts were incurred by late 
filing of tax returns but the tax debts have been resolved or being resolved. There is a 
more fundamental issue for security clearance purposes than just failing to pay taxes. 
Applicant admits she did not timely file her federal and state tax returns for at least eight 
tax years because she did not have the funds to pay the taxes. The lack of funds to pay 
taxes does not relieve a person from timely filing tax returns. Applicant’s lack of action 
to file the returns resulted in her financial problems being ongoing and recent, and not 
incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely.  
 
Applicant has to establish her good-faith efforts to meet her financial obligations. 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant must act responsibly given her 
circumstances. She must establish that she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems, and that she has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s 
plan must show a systematic method of handling financial obligations. Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of filing tax returns and resolving debts. A 
meaningful track record of tax return filing and resolving debt can be established by 
evidence of actually filing tax returns and establishing a plan to pay debts. A promise to 
file tax returns and pay debts is not a substitute for a track record of filing returns in a 
timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant filed her federal tax returns for tax years 2009 and 2010 in October 
2012; federal tax returns for tax year 2011 in July 2017; for tax years 2012, 2013, and 
2014 in December 2015, and for tax year 2016 in July 2017. She has yet to file her 
 
7 
 
 
2015 federal tax returns. She filed all of her state tax returns in August 2017. All of the 
above tax returns were filed late, and not when due.  
 
Applicant knew when she completed her e-QIP in December 2015 that she had 
not timely filed her federal and state tax returns from 2009 to 2014. Her knowledge 
about not timely filing the tax returns was reinforced by her answers to the security 
investigator in March 2017, and her responses to interrogatories in August 2017. After 
completing her e-QIP and talking to a security investigator about timely filing income tax 
returns, Applicant completed filing her tax returns.  
 
 Failure to timely file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. It is well known that 
federal tax returns for a particular tax years are to be filed by April 15 of the following 
year. Voluntary compliance with government rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified and sensitive information. A person who fails to fulfill his or her 
legal obligation to timely file tax returns does not demonstrate the high degree of good 
judgment and reliability required for a grant of access to classified or sensitive 
information. An applicant’s failure to timely file tax returns is a strong indication that the 
individual will not follow the rules and guidance concerning safeguarding classified and 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant has now filed and paid or is paying her past due taxes. Even if an 
applicant attempts to correct the tax return problem, there must still be careful 
consideration of the applicant’s trustworthiness in view of his or her longstanding prior 
behavior evidencing irresponsibility by failing to timely file income tax returns. There are 
procedures available to a tax payer to file tax returns even if they do not have the funds 
to pay the taxes due. Applicant did not follow the established government rules and 
procedures and contact federal and state tax authorities for help to understand the 
actions she must take. She just simply failed to file the tax returns. By failing to timely 
file state and federal tax returns for at least eight years, Applicant did not demonstrate 
the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to 
classified or sensitive information  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence that she received financial counseling. 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what she did to address the tax return 
allegations in the SOR. It is a requirement of good citizenship to timely filing income tax 
returns. The fact that she did not timely file returns because she did not have sufficient 
funds to pay the taxes due does not indicate that the Applicant was acting responsibly 
and reliably. Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to show that she 
diligently resolved the tax return filing issue that was ongoing for at least eight years. 
There is insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving her tax return problem. There is adequate evidence to show that she 
is now resolving the tax debts from her federal and state taxes. But there is insufficient 
evidence that she is paying or resolving some of the other SOR debts. There is 
insufficient assurance that her tax filing and financial problems are being resolved, are 
under control, and will not recur in the future. Her lack of reasonable and responsible 
 
8 
 
 
actions towards her tax returns and her debts are a strong indication that she will not 
protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. Under all these circumstances, 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that she took reasonable and responsible 
action to resolve her tax and financial obligations. Applicant did not demonstrate 
appropriate management of her finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
She has not established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
