 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00483 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 30, 2015. On 
March 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2017, and requested a decision based on 
the written administrative record, without a hearing before an administrative judge. He 
subsequently requested a hearing.2 Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
January 29, 2018, and the case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018. On April 23, 2018, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for May 21, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
but did not present the testimony of any witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. 
I kept the record open until June 6, 2018, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. 
He did not submit anything further. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old electrician employed by a defense contractor since 
August 2013. He was employed in the private sector as an electrician from March 2002 
to 2013. He married in September 1998 and divorced in April 2013. He has a 12-year-old 
son. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 The four delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are credit-card accounts reflected in 
credit reports from November 2015 (GX 2), December 2016 (GX 3), and May 2018 (GX 
3.) The two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were cancelled in December 2016 and 
an IRS Form 1099-C was issued for each debt. (Attachment to SOR Answer.) The debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was cancelled and an IRS Form 1099-C was issued in December 
2015. (GX 5.) Applicant testified that he paid taxes on the cancelled debts. (Tr. 19, 31.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began around 2012 or 2013. He attributed his 
financial problems to having too many credit cards and using one card to pay the balance 
on another. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 18.) He testified that he did not use the credit cards for 
purchases, but to pay bills because using a credit card was more convenient than writing 
a check. (Tr. 40-41.) ) For a while, he was making less than the minimum payments on 
the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He then stopped making payments on these 
two accounts in an effort to catch up with his other bills. (Tr. 25.) He testified that he had 
no records of payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not know why the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.c cancelled the debts. He testified that he did not ask the creditors to cancel 
the debts or issue an IRS Form 1099-C, but that they “just showed up in the mail.” (Tr. 
46.) He testified that he contacted the creditor who sent the forms for the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and a creditor’s representative told him that they could not find his 
accounts. (Tr. 43.) 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant did not expressly admit or deny any of the allegations in his answer to the SOR. 
 
3 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that he was making regular payments of $465 per month on the 
credit-card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and that it would be paid off in two months. (Tr. 
36, 52-53.) He provided no documentary evidence of a payment agreement or any 
payments. However, the May 2018 credit report reflects that he made a payment on the 
account in March 2018, and he has reduced the balance from $14,708 (the amount 
alleged in the SOR and reflected in GX 2) to $2,123. (GX 4 at 2.) 
 
In 2013, Applicant was earning about $50,000 per year, his then wife was making 
about $60,000 per year, and they were able to keep up with the payments on the home 
mortgage loan and their car payments. (Tr. 28.) The mortgage lender was the same bank 
as the creditor in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. (Tr. 26.)  
 
Applicant’s divorce was the result of financial problems. (Tr. 27.) He testified that 
he is now earning about $60,000 per year. He has never received financial counseling. 
(Tr. 38.) However, he testified that he now has a net monthly remainder of about $1,000 
and is financially “doing well.” (Tr. 37.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
 
4 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 The documentary evidence and Applicant’s testimony at the hearing establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) are not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are 
recent, numerous, were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur, 
and were not incurred due to conditions largely beyond his control. He has not received 
financial counseling. Although the cancellation of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.c reduces Applicant’s vulnerability to coercion or exploitation and the temptation to 
engage in illegal conduct, the cancellation of the debts does not overcome the evidence 
of financial irresponsibility that caused the debts and does not constitute a good-faith 
effort to resolve them.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Although Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence of a payment plan or systematic payments on the 
debt, the May 2018 credit report reflects a payment in March 2018 and a significant 
reduction in the balance due. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
6 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has made progress in 
resolving his financial problems, but insufficient time has passed to conclude that he has 
left his bad financial habits behind him. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
