 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02080 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant experienced 
financial problems during his eight-year marriage, which ended in 2017. These 
problems were exacerbated by extended periods of unemployment for Applicant and his 
ex-wife. Since the divorce, Applicant has initiated and adhered to a good-faith effort to 
repay his creditors. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on May 24, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
timely submitted AE J through M, which are also admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2018.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.e to conform to 
GE 2, a document from the IRS indicating that Applicant owes federal income taxes for 
the 2014 tax year, not the 2015 tax year as alleged. Applicant did not object and 
admitted to the amended allegation.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 47, has worked as a freelance facility security officer (FSO) for several 
federal contracting companies since late 2015. He completed his most recent security 
clearance application in April 2014 and disclosed ongoing financial problems, including 
delinquent accounts and his attempts to rehabilitate his delinquent mortgage. Based on 
Applicant’s disclosures and the information developed during his background 
investigation, the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to five creditors for $108,600 in 
delinquent debt, comprised of two credit cards (SOR ¶ 1.a $11,708, SOR ¶ 1.c 
$33,532); a past-due mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.b $39,912); unpaid federal taxes SOR ¶ 
1.e $9,790, SOR ¶ 1.f $11,654); and unpaid state taxes (SOR ¶ 1.g $2,556). Applicant 
admits the SOR allegations.3  
 
 Applicant began his career as a teacher, earning $30,000 annually. In November 
2000, he began working for his father’s federal contracting company, receiving an 
increase in pay to $50,000 annually. Applicant admits that with the income increase his 
spending became frivolous and more out of control. However, as he began training to 
become an FSO, he decided to reign in his spending and reduced his use of consumer 
credit. In 2009, Applicant left his father’s company and began working for another 
federal contracting company as an FSO.4  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant married. He entered the marriage with approximately 
$35,000 in credit-card debt in good standing (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c), and became 
financially responsible for all of the family’s financial obligations. Applicant’s wife 
continued to pay her car loan, her student loans, and her daughter’s private-school 
tuition. Applicant’s wife was also responsible for arranging the preparation and filing of 
the couple’s state and federal income tax returns. Applicant did not know his wife’s 
                                                          
2 Tr. 10-11. 
 
3 Tr. 73-74; GE 1 – 6.  
 
4 Tr. 75-76.  
 
3 
 
annual salary or the amount of income taxes she had withheld from her pay. Between 
2009 and 2015, the couple filed using the married-filing-jointly status. Although 
Applicant reviewed the tax returns, he did not question the couple’s federal or state 
income tax liabilities. For the 2016 income tax returns, the couple filed using the 
married-filing-separately status. Applicant filed his 2017 federal and state income tax 
returns using the single status. He owed $350, which he paid.5 
  
According to Applicant, the couple began to experience financial problems by the 
second year of their marriage as he realized that the lifestyle that his wife wanted 
required them to live beyond their means. In 2009, facing financial problems at home, 
Applicant used his then-employer’s credit card to pay a household bill. When confronted 
by his employer, Applicant admitted his misconduct and paid the credit card balance. 
He was laid off six months after the incident. He regrets his poor judgment and vows to 
never repeat such conduct.6  
 
 Between March 2010 and July 2013, Applicant experienced a total of 28 months 
of unemployment. During his periods of unemployment, Applicant relied on his 
retirement savings, unemployment compensation, financial assistance from his parents, 
and the credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to support his family. Applicant attributes 35% 
of the alleged balance to charges made during the marriage. His wife did not contribute 
to the household expenses during these times. In addition to his unemployment, 
Applicant’s wife experienced a number of health issues that resulted in her having to 
take periods of extended medical leave, which Applicant believes accumulated to 
approximately 24 months. Because she exhausted her vacation and sick leave, some of 
her medical leave was unpaid. During these periods, Applicant paid her expenses in 
addition to those of the household. Applicant admits that he allowed the credit cards 
alleged in SOR to become delinquent because he put his wife’s and stepdaughter’s 
needs above his own.7 
 
 Applicant’s friends and family members noticed a change in Applicant’s financial 
habits during his marriage. Applicant’s cousin, who testified at the hearing and lived with 
Applicant prior the marriage, described Applicant’s attention to financial details and how 
Applicant impressed upon the younger man the importance of maintaining fiscal 
responsibility. The same cousin lived with Applicant again after Applicant married. 
Applicant’s cousin noticed a marked change in Applicant’s behavior and noted the 
tension in the marriage caused by the household finances. Applicant’s close friend and 
Applicant’s father, both of whom also testified at the hearing, observed the same 
changes in Applicant’s behavior.8  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 77-79, 85-88, 94-95; GE 2; AE H.  
 
6 Tr. 79, 89-90, 96; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. 79-81, 84-97; GE 1.  
 
8 Tr. 20-65.  
 
4 
 
 Applicant and his wife separated in July 2017 and their divorce was finalized in 
November 2017. Applicant voluntarily assumed financial responsibility for all of the 
marital consumer and tax debt. He chose to do so because he wanted to ensure that all 
of the financial obligations attributable to him were paid. He did not trust his ex-wife, 
whose job does not require a security clearance, to pay her share of their federal and 
state income tax liabilities and consumer debt. Since the divorce, Applicant has 
prioritized paying off these debt and rehabilitating his finances.9  
 
To date, he has entered into a payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
paying $100 per month since at least June 2017. Applicant has rehabilitated the alleged 
mortgage, SOR ¶ 1.b, and the account is in good standing.  He has also entered into an 
installment agreement with the IRS for $500 per month to resolve the outstanding 
federal tax liabilities alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. Applicant provided documentation 
showing payments for the past 18 months. He has resolved his outstanding state tax 
liability alleged in ¶ 1.g. Applicant claims to be making payments on the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c, a delinquent credit card for $33,532. According to Applicant, he pays at least 
$200 per month toward this account. Although the creditor declined to provide 
documentation corroborating the payment arrangement, the balance has decreased 
$8,000 to $25,517 as of May 2018.10 
 
 In 2017, Applicant earned approximately $162,000. Each month he pays $1,300 
towards the resolution of his delinquent accounts. After paying his financial obligations, 
Applicant has approximately $1,300 in disposable income each month. He currently 
maintains one credit card that he uses sparingly. Since his divorce, each witness 
testified that they have observed Applicant return to the responsible financial habits he 
had before his marriage. Applicant believes that his current finances are stable and that 
he lives within his means.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
9 Tr. 70; AE A.  
 
10 Tr. 66-70, 83, 89; AE A-M.  
 
11 Tr. 91-93.  
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.12 The record is sufficient to establish the government’s prima 
facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations.13  Between 
2009 and 2010, Applicant’s financial problems became so acute that he used his 
corporate credit card to pay a household expense, an intentional financial breach of his 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 18. 
 
13 AG ¶¶ 19(c) and 19(f). 
 
 
6 
 
employer’s trust.14 However, he has provided sufficient information to mitigate the 
alleged concerns. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems occurred during his marriage between 2009 and 
2017. He assumed financial responsibility for the household financial obligations and, at 
times his wife’s personal financial obligations, to the detriment of his own. Applicant 
admits that he was overextended. He expressed regret and remorse for using his 
employer’s credit card for personal use. He acknowledges that doing so showed poor 
judgment and impugned his trustworthiness. However, this is an isolated incident for 
which Applicant made restitution almost eight years ago. Even though his finances 
remained strained for the next several years he did not engage in similar conduct 
again.15  
 
During his marriage, Applicant also experienced financial difficulty caused by 
events beyond his control, including 28 months of unemployment and his wife’s periods 
of unpaid medical leave. Applicant has demonstrated that he acted responsibly in light 
of these circumstances to repay his creditors and rehabilitate his finances.16  
 
  Upon his separation and subsequent divorce in 2017, Applicant, understanding 
the importance of maintaining fiscal responsibility as a clearance holder, voluntarily 
assumed responsibility for all of the marital debt to ensure that all of his creditors were 
repaid. Applicant’s actions show that he initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He has entered into payment agreements to repay the 
credit-card balances alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, reducing the balances by $1,300 
and $8,000, respectively. Applicant has refinanced and rehabilitated his home 
mortgage. He has continued to comply with the terms of the installment agreement he 
entered into with the IRS in December 2016 to pay the couple’s and his outstanding 
federal income tax debt. He has paid the state tax liability incurred during the marriage 
in full.17  
 
 Based on a consideration of the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability 
to properly handle and safeguard classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
have also considered the whole-person factors detailed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicants are not 
held to a standard of perfection. While Applicant made some financial missteps during 
his marriage, he has demonstrated that he understands the connection between 
financial responsibility and being a clearance holder. The Appeal Board has held that, 
“an applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
                                                          
14 AG ¶ 19(d). 
 
15 AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
16 AG ¶ 20(b). 
  
17 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
7 
 
plan.18 Applicant has done so, which in addition to his efforts to rehabilitate his finances, 
mitigates the security concerns raised by his delinquent accounts.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
18 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
