 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03673 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on January 5, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 22, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for July 11, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
July 19, 2018. 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 2016. He served in the U.S. military from 2007 until he 
was honorably discharged in 2016. He attended college for a period without earning a 
degree. He is divorced with one child.1 
 
Applicant was stationed overseas from 2011 until he was discharged in 2016. He 
married in 2012. He could have petitioned for the military to sponsor his wife to live in 
the foreign country. He did not seek command sponsorship because that would have 
added a year to his time overseas, and he was already accepted for a different billet 
that he did not want to lose.2  
 
Without command sponsorship, Applicant’s wife could only stay in the foreign 
country for up to six months. She lived with her father when she was in the United 
States, but from their wedding to mid-2014, she spent the majority of her time with 
Applicant in the foreign country. She “started coming out for four months and then she 
would go back for a month or a month and a half and then she would come back for 
another five months and then go back because of [foreign country’s] immigration laws.” 
Applicant received Overseas Housing Allowance (OHA) in his own right. Because his 
wife had an address in the United States, he also rated Family Separation Allowance 
(FSA) and Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH). The OHA was to pay for Applicant’s 
housing in the foreign country; the BAH was to pay for his wife’s housing in the United 
States; and FSA is designed to offset the incidental expenses that arise when a family is 
separated.3 
 
Applicant submitted an Individual OHA Report, DD Form 2367, in 2012 shortly 
before he married and another DD Form 2367 about two weeks after he married. He 
certified that he would “immediately inform my commanding officer if any changes occur 
to the information I have provided.”4 He did not receive FSA and BAH for about the first 
year of his marriage. He submitted a Statement to Substantiate Payment of FSA, DD 
Form 1561, in July 2013. The form was used to compute his entitlements to FSA and 
BAH for the previous year as well as FSA and BAH payments going forward. His wife 
was staying with him at the time, but he provided his wife’s address in the United 
States.5 Above his signature on the form is the following: 
 
I understand that I must notify my commanding officer immediately upon 
any change in dependency status and if my sole dependent or all of my 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 50-54, 60, 66, 74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, D.  
 
2 Tr. at 53, 77-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
3 Tr. at 77-80; GE 2.  
 
4 The first DD Form 2367 was admitted as GE 7. The second DD Form 2367 was not admitted in 
evidence. The above facts was ascertained from other exhibits. See GE 3-5. 
 
5 GE 2, 4, 6.  
 
3 
 
dependents move to or near this station or if my dependent(s) visit at or 
near this station for more than 90 continuous days (more than 30 
continuous days in the case of FSA-T (Temp) or FSA-S (Ship)) while I am 
in receipt of FSA.6 
 
Applicant was required to notify his commanding officer that his wife was visiting for 
more than 90 days because his FSA and BAH would stop while she was visiting him.7  
 
 Applicant was referred to a special court-martial for the following charges under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ): 
 
 Article 92: Dereliction of duty between September 2012 and May 2014 in that he 
willfully failed to inform his commanding officer of a change to his entitlement to a 
cost-of-living or overseas housing allowance for dependents residing elsewhere 
as he claimed on his DD Form 2367 in July 2012. 
 
 Article 107: False official statement in July 2013 when he signed with intent to 
deceive an official document, to wit: DD Form 1561, which he knew to be false in 
that he reported that his dependent was residing at a U.S. address, when his 
dependent was residing overseas. 
 
 Article 121; Larceny in that between September 2012 and May 2014, he stole 
more than $500 from the U.S. Government.8 
 
Applicant pleaded not guilty to all charges before a court-martial panel of officers 
and enlisted members, and he testified at his trial. He was found guilty of the Article 92 
and 107 charges and not guilty of the Article 121 charge. He was sentenced to be 
reduced one pay grade to E-4 and confinement for 30 days. He served his sentence.9 
 
Applicant asserted that he accepts responsibility for his conduct. He stated that 
never intended to receive money he did not rate. He stated that he did not read the part 
of the form that stated that he was required to notify his commanding officer if his wife 
visited for more than 90 days. He listed his wife’s U.S. address on the form after 
consulting with a finance clerk, because the form was to get back pay when she was 
living in the United States. He asserted that “[a]t no point were [his] intentions malicious 
or trying to deceive the United States.” He stated that he received a lump-sum payment 
of about $50,000 in 2013, which was about $25,000 more than he should have received 
even if his wife never visited him. He promptly reported the overpayment and paid about 
$25,000 back to the U.S. Government. He further stated that all the money he received 
                                                          
6 GE 6.  
 
7 Tr. at 55, 80-81.  
 
8 GE 3.  
 
9 Tr. at 54-60, 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4.  
 
4 
 
that he did not rate was paid back before the court-martial. He stated that the 
experience taught him a valuable lesson, and it will not be repeated. 10  
 
 Applicant deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan while in the military. Three witnesses 
testified, and he submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent job 
performance in the military and in his civilian job. He is praised for his honesty, work 
ethic, trustworthiness, moral character, leadership, dedication, responsibility, and 
integrity. He is recommended for a security clearance.11  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 55-75; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
11 Tr. at 14-49, 53; AE A-D, G. 
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
 
6 
 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant was convicted at a court-martial for false official statement and 
dereliction of duty. That conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly 
applicable because Applicant’s conduct could have been sufficient for an adverse 
determination under the criminal conduct guideline. However, the general concerns 
about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established. Applicant’s false official statement 
establishes AG ¶ 16(a).   
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
7 
 
Applicant asserted that he accepts responsibility for his conduct. But he also 
stated that he never intended to receive money he did not rate; he did not read the 
paragraph that told him that he was required to inform his commanding officer if his wife 
visited for more than 90 days; and he listed his wife’s U.S. address on the Form 1561 
after consulting with the finance clerk. 
 
Applicant presumably provided similar testimony at his court-martial, yet he was 
convicted of two specific intent offenses: willful dereliction of duty and false official 
statement. Willfully “means intentionally. It refers to the doing of an act knowingly and 
purposely, specifically intending the natural and probable consequences of the act.”12 
For false official statement, there must be knowledge that the statement was false, and 
it must be “made with the intent to deceive.”13 I did not find Applicant’s testimony 
credible. It is insufficient to overcome the conduct, which was established beyond a 
reasonable doubt at a court-martial. 
 
I find the conduct continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I am unable to determine that similar behavior is 
unlikely to recur. There are no mitigating conditions sufficiently applicable to alleviate 
personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
                                                          
12 See Manual for Courts-Martial United States (2012 Edition) at https://www.marines.mil/Portals/59/ 
Publications/MCM2012.pdf.  
 
13 See Manual for Courts-Martial United States (2012 Edition).  
 
 
8 
 
character evidence and honorable military service, including his deployments to Iraq 
and Afghanistan. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
