 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-04403 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 20, 2016. 
(Item 3.) On March 27, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 29, 2018. (Answer), and on April 4, 2018, 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on March 29, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 
9. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. Applicant responded to the FORM in a timely 
 
2 
 
manner and presented documentation from his bankruptcy attorney, which was included 
in the record, without objection, as AX A. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 45, is divorced and has three adult children. In June 1991, he 
earned his GED. He has been employed with his current employer since October 2016, 
as an aircraft painter. He was self-employed as a truck driver from approximately March 
1999 to October 2016. He still drives a truck to supplement his income.  Between October 
2009 and November 2010, he worked for another defense contractor. He holds an interim 
DOD security clearance. (Item 3) 
 
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) sets forth security concerns under Guideline F 
listing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was filed in 2008 and discharged in 2011; and a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in May 2017, currently pending. Applicant admits both 
allegations. (Item 1) 
 
With regard to the 2008 bankruptcy, Applicant states in his Answer that he filed 
this bankruptcy due to financial hardship, citing his separation from his spouse, followed 
by their divorce in 2011. (Item 2) He filed for bankruptcy again in May 2017, citing lack of 
work and financial hardship. In his SCA, he reported filing for bankruptcy in the past. 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney provided in response to the FORM that the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in May 2017 is current with payments of $680 bi-weekly. She 
elaborated that the payments are timely made and in full with no delinquencies. There is 
a deduction order for the payments in effect at Applicant’s place of employment. The 
bankruptcy case is estimated to take a total of 61 months to complete. As it is set up, it 
will satisfy the debt to Applicant’s car creditor and will maintain regular mortgage 
payments, as well as cure the mortgage arrears that were due at the time the bankruptcy 
case was filed. If the case continues, approximately 23% of the total unsecured debt will 
be paid and the remainder of debt will be discharged. (AX A) 
 
In Applicant’s 2017 investigative interview, he was uncertain of the dates of other 
bankruptcies that were filed. He stated that some were filed in his wife’s name, but he 
was not sure of the dates or type of bankruptcy. He explained that his wife handled the 
financial matters.  One of the bankruptcy petitions was filed to avoid a home foreclosure. 
(Item 4) Due to the passage of time, he is unable to recall specific debts and amounts of 
debt included in each bankruptcy. However, he does recall that many were related to 
home repairs and truck repairs. He had an old truck, but he has now replaced it with a 
newer one. When he was self-employed, due to lack of regular income, he had mortgage 
arrearages several times. He wanted to keep his home which he has lived in for many 
years. He also stated that his ex-wife has all the documents. (Item 4) 
 
The record evidence establishes that Applicant has filed for bankruptcy six times: 
under Chapter 13 in December 1994, terminated; in January 1996; under Chapter 7 in 
October 2008, converted to Chapter 13 in March 2011; and then back to Chapter 7 again 
and discharged in June 2011; under Chapter 13 in December 2011 and dismissed in 2012 
 
3 
 
for failure to make plan payments; under Chapter 13 in December 2013 and dismissed in 
August 2014 for failure to make payments; under Chapter 13 in July 2015 dismissed upon 
trustee’s motion, after Applicant failed to provide for payment of domestic support arrears, 
and under Chapter 13 in May 2017. This most recent bankruptcy was confirmed in 
November 2017. (Items 5, 6, and 7) 
 
Applicant’s numerous bankruptcy filings have resulted in one being discharged and 
dismissal for two of them for failure to make payments suggesting ongoing financial 
hardship. There is no evidence that Applicant lived beyond his means. Many of the 
accounts in the earlier bankruptcy in 2015, were medical bills. None were for tax bills.  His 
bankruptcy attorney provided that the debt is not unusual in amount or type. (AX A) 
Applicant has also had difficulty earning an income to support his family due to truck 
driving, with no other skills. It was not until after 2010, when Applicant secured a stable 
job with a defense contractor, that things have improved. (AX A) He lost the contract in 
2010 and had more years of relying on truck driving for a living.  Also the marital 
separation and divorce exacerbated the problems. Applicant told the investigator that with 
this job as an airplane painter with a defense contractor his financial situation is stable. 
Before this current employment his monthly income was about $3,500.  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney has confirmed that Applicant is current on his 2017 
bankruptcy payment plan and has a track record of one year of payments. Applicant has 
chosen the wage earner’s bankruptcy (Chapter 13) so that he can repay creditors rather 
than Chapter 7. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
4 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his two SOR bankruptcy filings, establish 
two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), 
 
5 
 
and  AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s current Chapter 13 bankruptcy was 
filed in 2017. The other SOR alleged bankruptcy has been discharged. However, the 
record evidence shows other bankruptcies from the past. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant drove a truck for a living for many years. His 
income fluctuated and was non-existent at times. He had a separation and divorce. He 
sought bankruptcy as a legitimate way to resolve debt and to keep his home from 
foreclosure. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy so that he could repay debtors. He has 
been striving to provide for his family and pay his bills. He is now divorced and the children 
are adults There is no evidence of living beyond his means. He acted responsibly under 
his circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are established. Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided documentation of a year of payments on his Chapter 13 bankruptcy (wage 
earner’s plan). The money is automatically deducted from his pay over a five-year period. 
This practice increases the likelihood that payments will be made on time and that the 
debtor will complete the plan. As a part of bankruptcy petitions and filings, one must 
complete the financial counseling course. According to his bankruptcy attorney, Applicant 
is on track with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant has a stable income and also 
continues to drive his truck to supplement his income. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The   website   for   U.S.   Courts   explains   the   basics  for  a  chapter  13  bankruptcy:  
  
The provisions of a confirmed plan bind the debtor and each creditor.11 
U.S.C. Section 1327. Once the court confirms the plan, the debtor must 
Make the plan succeed. The debtor must make regular payments to the 
Trustee either directly or through payroll deduction, which will require an 
Adjustment to living on a fixed budget for a prolonged period. Furthermore, 
While confirmation of the plan entitles the debtor to retain property as long 
As payments are made, the debtor may not incur new debt without 
consulting the trustee because additional debt may compromise the 
debtor’s ability to complete the plan. 11 U.S.C. Sections 1305(c) 1322(a)(1), 
1327. 
 
Applicant met his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR. For 
these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1b for Applicant. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including Applicant’s low-paying self-employment for many years, 
separation and divorce and providing for his family by keeping his home from foreclosure, 
I conclude that Applicant carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-b:  For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
