 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03679 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 29, 2016. On 
November 17, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 7, 2018, 
and the case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018. On April 23, 2018, the Defense Office 
 
2 
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
May 21, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 
4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not present the 
testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept the record 
open until June 6, 2018, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He did not submit 
anything further. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and 1.g-1.i and denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old electrician employed by a defense contractor since 
February 2015. He stated at the hearing that he has held a clearance in the past, but it 
was not reflected in his security clearance application. (Tr. 6-7; GX 1 at 29.) He was fired 
by a defense contractor in February 2013 for repeated tardiness, and he was unemployed 
until September 2014. He worked for a non-federal employer from September to 
December 2014 and then was unemployed until he was hired for his current job. (GX 1 
at 10-15.) 
 
 Applicant earns about $50,000 per year. His wife is employed and earns about the 
same pay. (Tr. 28-29.) At the hearing, he estimated that he and his wife jointly have take-
home pay of about $4,000 and a net monthly remainder of about $150. (Tr. 32-35.) The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h are reflected in the credit report from March 2016. (GX 
2.) The unsatisfied judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, which Applicant denied, is reflected in 
the March 2016 credit report (GX 2) but not the two more recent credit reports from 
October 2017 and May 2018 (GX 3 and 4). 
 
 Applicant admitted the delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He 
has taken no action to resolve them. (Tr. 36-37.) The credit report from May 2018 reflects 
that all of Applicant’s delinquent student loans were assigned to the U.S. Department of 
Education and are delinquent. (GX 4.) 
 
 The $3,941 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was incurred in 2012. Applicant 
testified that he thought the debt was paid by his medical insurance, but it has not been 
resolved. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he had been making payments on the $525 medical bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and the balance had been cut in half. (Tr. 40-41.) He did not provide 
any documentation to support his testimony.  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that the $446 cellphone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, the delinquent 
bridge tolls for $58 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and the $25 medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
were paid in full. (Tr. 41, 45-48.) He did not provide any documentation to support his 
testimony.  
 
 Applicant denied the unsatisfied judgment for $725, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. He 
testified that he has never done business with the bank alleged in the SOR. The judgment 
is reflected in the TransUnion credit report included in the combined credit report from 
March 2016 (GX 2 at 1), but it is not reflected in the two Equifax reports from October 
2017 and May 2018. (GX 3; GX 4.) Applicant testified that he has not disputed this debt 
because he was unaware of it until Department Counsel sent him a copy of GX 2. (Tr. 
54.) 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR and at the hearing, he admitted the delinquent 
federal tax debt for tax years 2014 and 2015, totaling about $2,785, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
This debt is not reflected in any of the credit reports submitted by Department Counsel. 
Applicant testified that he had a payment plan in place for $100 per month by automatic 
debit, but the payments were stopped when he lost his debit card. He submitted no 
evidence of payments or a payment plan. He testified that he tried to contact the IRS for 
about a month and then forgot about it because of the demands of his job. (Tr. 48-50.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
 
5 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, corroborated 
by the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing, establish the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. Department Counsel submitted no documentary evidence to 
support the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.i, but it is established by Applicant’s admissions in his 
answer to the SOR and at the hearing.  
 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f is not established. Applicant denied it, and the 
conflicting credit reports are insufficient to overcome his denial. The judgment was 
entered in December 2011, and it is too recent to have been deleted from the October 
2017 credit report under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,2 suggesting that it may have been 
resolved. 
 
The evidence supporting SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.g-1.i is sufficient to raise the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to . . . pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
                                                          
2 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of 
limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 15 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
 
6 
 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s unemployment from February 2013 
to September 2014 was not a condition largely beyond his control, because it occurred 
after he was fired for tardiness. His unemployment from December 2014 to February 2015 
was a condition beyond his control, but he submitted no documentary evidence that he 
acted responsibly. He has not received financial counseling and his financial problems 
are not under control. Although he claimed that he has been making payments on some 
of his debts, including his federal tax debt, he has provided no documentary evidence to 
support his claims, even though he was given additional time after the hearing to provide 
it. An applicant who claims to have made payments on his debts is expected to provide 
documentary evidence to support his claims. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3 I have incorporated 
my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis and applied the 
adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
delinquent debts. 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
