KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings about Applicant’s wife’s green card status are based on
substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences or conclusions that could be drawn from
the evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02488.a1
DATE: 08/30/2018
DATE: August 30, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02488
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 7, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On June 6, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant was born overseas and immigrated to the United States after completing two years
of college.  He completed his bachelor’s degree in the United States and became a U.S. citizen in
2004.  He has worked overseas for the U.S. Government as a translator and interpreter.  He met his
wife, who is a citizen of China, while both of them were studying overseas.  In 2014, he traveled to
China to meet her parents who initially objected to their marriage because he is not Chinese.  They
married in the United States later that year.  His wife applied for permanent U.S. residence status
and a work permit.  She was issued a temporary green card that expired in 2017.  He stated that she
has not renewed the card yet because it requires a lot of paperwork.  She resided in the U.S. for
about a year, but now resides with Applicant in a third country.  She has traveled to China annually
in the past four years.  She intends to become a U.S. citizen.  In 2015, they had a child.1 
Applicant has in-laws, who are citizens and residents of China; including his father-in-law,
who sells equipment; mother-in-law, who is an agricultural worker; and brother-in-law, who is
married and has children.  His wife has other extended family members in China.  She is close to
her relatives.   He communicates with his Chinese relatives through his wife and is attempting to
learn their language.   To his knowledge, none of his relatives are affiliated with the Government
of China.  
Except for a 401(k) account, Applicant has no assets in the United States.  He provided
letters from U.S. military personnel who consider him a dedicated professional.   
1 Applicant’s child is a U.S. citizen born abroad.  See, Applicant’s SOR Response. 
2
China is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. 
China’s intelligence services frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties
to China who have insider access to corporate secrets.  China has a large, professional cyber
espionage community and uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against U.S.
diplomatic, economic, and defense entities.  Over the past 15 years, Chinese espionage against the
United States has risen significantly.  China is an authoritarian state with a wide variety of human
rights violations. 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s relationship with his wife and her relationship with family in China could create
the risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  His wife has spent minimal time living in the United
States.  Her ties to China are extensive.  He has no assets, except a pension plan in the United States. 
Based on the facts in this case, “[i]t is too great of a burden to expect him to be loyal to the interests
of the United States and resolve any conflicts in favor of the United States over those of his wife and
in-laws in China.”  Decision at 9.  
Discussion
Applicant’s Counsel contends the Judge erroneously found that Applicant’s wife has a
temporary green card that expired in 2017 and was not renewed because it requires a lot of
paperwork.  In making his argument, Applicant’s Counsel generally refers to Applicant’s SOR
Response and testimony, but does not identify any specific parts of the SOR Response or the hearing
transcript that support his claim.  Applicant’s SOR Response contains a copy of his wife’s green
card that reflects she became a resident and the card expired in 2017.  In testifying about his wife’s
efforts to obtain U.S. citizenship, Applicant stated:
[Applicant]:  And the -- her green card is still temporary.  So she would have to go
through a long paperwork process to get some kind of permit to come to the U.S.,
because her first card has conditions and it expires in [month in 2017], two years, so
it expired last [month in 2017].
We applied on time to remove the condition, but it takes a long time.  So she
has to -- we have to -- we will have to talk with the embassy and get some paperwork
for her to even visit now.  So that’s also another --  
[Judge]:  So she doesn’t --
[Applicant]:  -- consideration.  
[Judge]:  -- so she doesn’t have a green card at this point?
3
[Applicant]:  She has -- she doesn’t lose her status, but like, she has to get special
paperwork, because her card is physically -- it says, expiration date is [month in]
2017, but the law provides that she does have the right to return.
She just has to do -- she has to do some paperwork and it’s not -- it’s a little
complicated.  So, when she -- but when they adjudicate her case, the first thing she
will have to do is come to D.C. and pledge allegiance.2      
From our review of the record, the Judge’s material findings about Applicant’s wife’s green card 
status are based on substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences or conclusions that could
be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  
  
Applicant’s Counsel also argues that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence,
mis-weighed the evidence, and misapplied the mitigating conditions and whole-person concept.  His
arguments, however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of
the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7,
2017).   We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant’s Counsel has cited,
but it is neither binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s
decision.  Id.  Furthermore, the cited case is easily distinguishable on its facts. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
2 Tr. at 84-85.
4
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
