1 
 
                                                            
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01355 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Although the sexual behavior and criminal conduct allegations arose from behavior 
that occurred between 2005 and 2008, Applicant’s inconsistent statements and failure to 
accept any responsibility for his conduct remain concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 6, 2015. 
On July 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on August 16, 2017, and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
2 
 
Counsel was ready to proceed on October 4, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on 
December 14, 2017. On February 13, 2018, DOHA notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for March 6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and Applicant 
Exhibit (AX) A was admitted into evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 
14, 2018. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old software engineer currently employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2006. He was employed by another defense contractor from 
2002 until 2006. He was previously employed as a university mathematics professor, and 
continues to work as a part-time online mathematics instructor. Applicant received a 
bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in 2000, a master’s degree in electrical 
engineering in 2002, and a master’s degree in mathematics in 2005. He and his wife 
married in 2000 and they have four minor children. Applicant was granted his first security 
clearance in 2004, and his access to classified information was revoked in 2011. (GX 1; 
GX 7.)  
 
Under Guideline D, the SOR alleges that Applicant viewed child pornography from 
2005 until 2007, and that he engaged in two acts of voyeurism of underage girls in 2008. 
Under Guideline J, the SOR cross-alleges the Guideline D allegations. Applicant admits 
occasionally viewing images of naked underage girls in 2005, but denies that the images 
constituted child pornography, and admits the two acts of voyeurism. Applicant denies 
the Guideline J allegation.  
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his 2015 
e-QIP by intentionally mischaracterizing the reasons his clearance was denied by another 
government agency in 2009, and that Applicant intentionally falsified statements during a 
personal subject interview in May 2015 by failing to disclose the denial of his 2009 
clearance and the underlying conduct for that denial. The Guideline D allegations are also 
cross-alleged under Guideline E. Applicant denies these allegations.  
 
Applicant intentionally viewed naked children on multiple occasions on the Internet 
between 2005 and 2007. (GX 3; GX 5; Tr. 47-48; GX 6.) In order to view the naked 
children, Applicant would go to a pornography website that contained thumbnail images 
portraying young legal-aged women as teenagers. He would then click on a thumbnail 
that would lead him to a link that went to another site. After clicking on four or five 
subsequent links, Applicant would link to a site with images of naked or partially clad 
children between the ages of 7 and 14.  Applicant admits that, “there were times when I 
was curious and did view content from a site depicting minors.” However, he also states 
that at the recommendation of a coworker, he researched state law and believes that the 
images of naked children that he viewed do not fit the definition of child pornography, but 
are instead child erotica. (Answer.) As a result of viewing naked children on the internet, 
he failed two lifestyle polygraphs conducted by another government agency in October 
2007 and April 2008, and was scheduled for a third polygraph. (GX 6.)  
3 
 
In June 2008, while awaiting the third polygraph, Applicant committed two separate 
acts of voyeurism of underage girls. Applicant was on a mission trip to Ecuador with a 
group of people of various ages, including several girls aged 15 to 16, all staying as guests 
in the same house. From his bedroom, Applicant was able to look through cracks between 
boards that separated his bedroom from the bathroom. On the first occasion, Applicant 
heard two of the teenage girls enter the bathroom. He looked through a crack in the wall 
and was able to view the girls naked from the waist up. He watched them for 
approximately 30 seconds. He testified that after intentionally viewing the naked girls, he 
was concerned about the impact that his conduct would have during the upcoming 
polygraph and determined that he would not disclose his conduct. Despite his concern 
about the polygraph, two or three days later, Applicant was aware that the 15-year-old 
girl he had previously looked at had entered the bathroom. For approximately 30 seconds, 
he watched as the girl sat on the toilet and was able to see part of her buttocks as she 
stood up. (GX 6; Tr. 52-53.) 
 
During his third lifestyle polygraph in September 2008, Applicant disclosed during 
the pretest interview, that during a single occasion, he looked through cracks in the boards 
in the bedroom wall into the bathroom and observed two high-school-aged girls naked 
from the waist up for about 30 seconds. On that same occasion, he also observed one of 
the girls use the toilet, and observed her kneecaps then part of her buttocks for 
approximately 15 to 30 seconds. He stated that he was embarrassed and ashamed about 
this incident, and denied any other involvement in voyeuristic or “peeping Tom” activities. 
He further stated that he had determined before entering the polygraph suite that he would 
not, under any circumstances disclose the information about this event. However, after 
he was instructed by the interviewer that the only way to pass the polygraph examination 
was to be fully forthcoming, Applicant described the event. (GX 6.) 
 
After the polygraph concluded, Applicant was asked additional questions about 
participating in any serious crime by an interviewer. Applicant “clarified” that the shower 
incident occurred on the first day of the trip, and the second toilet incident occurred two 
or three days later. (GX 6.) As a result of concerns raised by Applicant’s viewing of child 
pornography and his acts of voyeurism, the other government agency issued a clearance 
decision statement in April 2009 denying Applicant’s eligibility for SCI access. (GX 6.) As 
a result of Applicant’s conduct, DOHA issued interrogatories to Applicant in March 2011. 
Applicant states that on the advice of a coworker, and because he did not fully understand 
the security clearance process, Applicant did not respond and DOHA revoked his 
clearance in June 2011. In August 2011, Applicant’s SCI access was revoked by a third 
government agency. Applicant stated that the reason he did not list the second and third 
revocations on his e-QIP was due to not paying enough attention. (GX 5; GX 7.) 
 
On his e-QIP submitted by Applicant in February 2015, he stated that he had a 
clearance denied by another government agency in May 2009. His explanation for the 
denial was that he was scheduled for a follow-up lifestyle polygraph when his employer’s 
contract changed and required only a counterintelligence polygraph rather than a lifestyle 
polygraph. Applicant’s then-facility-security-officer (FSO) “requested adjudication based 
on previous polygraphs. As a result, my appointment for the upcoming lifestyle polygraph 
4 
 
was canceled, and the other government agency’s adjudication process deemed me 
ineligible for access to their program.” (GX 1.) Applicant did not offer any details about 
the basis of his failing three lifestyle polygraphs, or the April 2009 clearance decision 
statement from the other government agency denying Applicant SCI access. 
 
Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his statements during his May 2015 
personal subject interview with the background investigator as alleged in the SOR. He 
specifically takes issue with the allegation that he told the investigator that the other 
government agency “canceled” Applicant’s clearance as opposed to denying the 
clearance. While this language is used in the SOR allegation, the crux of the allegation is 
that when Applicant stated that the reason his clearance was not granted was because 
his FSO canceled the lifestyle polygraph because it was no longer required for the 
contract, and the other government agency thereby stopped the processing of Applicant’s 
clearance, he made an intentional, material omission. Applicant did not disclose to the 
investigator that Applicant had failed three lifestyle polygraphs or that he had 
subsequently received a clearance decision statement wherein the basis for the denial of 
Applicant’s SCI access was set forth, or that Applicant opted not to appeal that decision. 
Applicant further contends that the background investigator improperly summarized 
Applicant’s statements. Specifically, Applicant states that he did not tell the investigator 
that he “never participated in any negative behavior,” instead, the investigator drew this 
conclusion and included it in the summary. Applicant explains that the investigator did not 
ask Applicant why his SCI access was denied, and therefore he did not disclose the 
underlying conduct. (GX 2; GX 5; Tr. 61.) 
 
Applicant underwent an enhanced subject interview under oath in September 
2016, during which Applicant discussed the reasons for his SCI clearance denial in 2009 
and signed a sworn affidavit regarding that information. Applicant stated that the 
information in the summary of the interview was accurate. (Tr. 29.) During this interview, 
Applicant told the investigator about the first voyeurism incident in June 2008, stating that 
he “did not deliberately attempt to be a peeping Tom.” The summary also states that “this 
was an isolated incident and there is no likelihood that this kind of incident would occur 
again.” The summary further states “the subject has had no other incidents involving 
voyeurism.” 
 
In his testimony and the 2016 affidavit, Applicant stated that he continued to view 
adult pornography on the Internet until late 2014. He further stated in the affidavit that his 
wife was aware of the timeframe of his last usage of pornography. In a February 2018 
signed letter addressed to me, Applicant’s wife stated that the birth of their first daughter 
nearly 12 years ago, 
 
was a catalyst for [Applicant] to renounce his viewing of all pornographic 
images, and since that time he has matured and stepped away from that. 
We share our computers at home, and I know all the passwords and am 
able to check the viewer history and I have not found any questionable 
material in years.  (AX A.) 
 
5 
 
Applicant testified that he and his wife installed a software program on their home 
computer to prevent access to pornographic websites. However, he further stated that: 
 
after a few months of having [the software] I  kind of figured out it didn't work 
in certain cases. And so, I would try to get around it. And even then you're 
kind of cautious because I don't know if she's really going to see it or not. 
And I would say that only happened for like a month or two and then we just 
did away with the [software]. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
Applicant denies the Guideline J allegation, stating: “To the best of my knowledge, 
I have not engaged in any criminal activity. While I admit to the behaviors described 
above, I do not believe them to be illegal or punishable by law in the jurisdictions where 
they occurred.” However, Applicant also stated, I became conscious of the ‘sickness’ of 
some of my Internet usage.” (Answer.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
6 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 13(a): sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the 
individual has been prosecuted; and 
 
AG ¶ (d): sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
7 
 
The following mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
AG ¶ 14(b):  the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
Although Applicant’s viewing of child pornography and acts of voyeurism of 
underage girls happened more than 10 years ago, it is not mitigated by the passage of 
time. Applicant’s inconsistent recounting of these events, his minimizing of the gravity of 
his actions, and his failure to accept responsibility for his behavior casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the mitigating conditions 
applies. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying condition applies under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted. 
 
The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d):  there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity… good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
While Applicant’s criminal conduct of viewing child pornography and committing 
acts of voyeurism occurred more than 10 years ago, his failure to accept responsibility for 
his conduct, evidenced by his completely inconsistent accounts of the events, his 
8 
 
minimizing of his actions, and his failure to accept responsibility for his conduct, continues 
to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Specifically, Applicant 
equivocates by stating that he does not believe his actions were criminal in the 
jurisdictions in which he committed them. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following 
will normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
9 
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
and 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; and 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States. 
 
17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
  
 An act of falsification has security significance independent of the underlying 
conduct. See ISCR Case No. 01-19278 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2003). The mitigation of 
the underlying conduct has little bearing on the security significance of the falsification, 
particularly where there are multiple falsifications. ISCR Case No. 08-11944 at 3 (App. 
10 
 
Bd. Aug 15, 2011). Previous inconsistent statements may be considered in assessing an 
applicant’s credibility, evaluating evidence, and considering whether the applicant has 
demonstrated rehabilitation, even though they were not alleged in the SOR. ISCR Case 
No. 08-09232 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010.) Falsification of a security clearance application 
“strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his recounting of his acts of voyeurism during his 
third lifestyle polygraph examination in September 2008 by stating that he committed only 
a single act of voyeurism. After additional questioning, Applicant admitted that he 
committed two acts of voyeurism. He deliberately omitted the underlying reasons for the 
2009 denial of his SCI access when completing his e-QIP and while undergoing a 
personal subject interview in 2015. Applicant intentionally falsified his statements about 
his 2008 acts of voyeurism during his 2016 enhanced subject interview. Despite his 
equivocations, Applicant admits to having viewed child pornography on multiple 
occasions, which constitutes criminal conduct. He committed two separate acts of 
voyeurism, which is criminal activity in the United States. Applicant continues to change 
his story about his viewing of child pornography. 
 
Applicant is highly educated and has held a security clearance since 2004. It is 
simply not plausible that Applicant did not understand that he was required to be 
forthcoming about his underlying conduct that resulted in his denial of all SCI access. His 
ongoing failure to accept responsibility for his actions, including his deliberate 
falsifications and omissions, and his overall lack of credibility, raise significant concerns 
about his ability to protect classified information. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
11 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines D, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, 
but I have also considered the following: 
  
 Applicant intentionally falsified statements during his 2016 enhanced subject 
interview, and continues to equivocate about his sexual behavior and criminal conduct. 
He has concealed his use of pornography from his wife by taking furtive actions. 
Applicant’s ongoing lack of consistency and clarity in recounting the details of his conduct, 
his minimizing of the gravity of his conduct, and his failure to accept responsibility for his 
behavior remain concerns.  
  
 After weighing the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines D, J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, 
I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his sexual 
behavior, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
   
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
