 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00297 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
        
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on November 13, 2017, and he elected 
a hearing. On May 24, 2018, a notice of hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
June 11, 2018. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. Applicant testified and submitted 
ten documents, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J.2 Department 
Counsel submitted four documents, which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
2 Transcript (Tr.) 31. Department Counsel objected to AE E on the basis of completeness. I overruled the 
objection and admitted AE E with the explanation that I cannot infer any information or evidence of any 
enclosures not included in the admitted exhibit. 
 
2 
 
through 4, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted one email and two 
attachments, which I admitted as AE K through M, without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript on June 20, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns based on Applicant’s 
six delinquent consumer debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.f.), two tax liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.g.-1.h.), and 
two unfiled tax returns (SOR ¶¶ 1.i.-1.j.). In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the delinquent debts and tax liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.h.). He denied the allegations of unfiled 
returns (SOR ¶¶ 1.i.-1.j.). After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1990 and a master’s 
degree in 1997. He married in 1992, and he has three children – ages 10, 13, and 16.3 
         
 In 2004, Applicant started his own business. In about 2007, his work slowed, 
requiring him to travel to increase his client base and income. The resulting travel and 
business expenses decreased his annual income by about 20-25%. Eventually, the 
business downturn caused him to obtain regular employment with a DOD contractor in 
July 2016. His self-employment continues but to a much-diminished degree.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, the November 2015 credit report, and the December 2016 
credit report established the six consumer debts, totaling approximately $6,700. Applicant 
testified that he remained delinquent on these debts, including his mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
and home-equity loan (SOR ¶ 1.b.), and that he initiated payment plans to resolve the 
deficiencies. There is no documentation of any payment plans or payments with respect 
to the six consumer debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.f.).4 
  
 Applicant’s admissions and the two credit reports established the state (SOR ¶ 
1.g.) and Federal (SOR ¶ 1.h.) tax liens filed in 2017. Although the total balances are not 
alleged, the documentary evidence and Applicant’s admissions established that he owed 
approximately $43,000 in delinquent state income taxes and owed approximately 
$307,000 in delinquent Federal income taxes for tax years 2008 through 2015 (excluding 
2010). Applicant presented documentary evidence of a repayment plan with the state and 
some efforts to establish a repayment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS); 
however, he provided documentary evidence of only one $1,000 payment to the IRS and 
no payments to the state. Applicant testified that he had made payments on his delinquent 
state taxes since about January 2017, but he provided no documentary evidence to 
support his claim. He admitted that he repeatedly initiated and defaulted on repayment 
plans with the IRS and that he had not made any payments to the IRS in at least six 
months.5 
                                                          
3 GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 37, 40. 
 
4 AE B-C; Tr. 52-59. 
 
5 AE E, F; Tr. 29, 65-70. 
 
3 
 
 
 During his September 2016 OPM interview, Applicant admitted that he had not yet 
filed his Federal and state tax returns for tax year 2015, SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j., respectively. 
At hearing, Applicant credibly testified that he had received extensions of time to file his 
returns and that he had subsequently filed the two returns. Applicant submitted his 
completed, though undated, tax returns and IRS documentation confirming that his 
returns had been filed.6  
 
 Besides the business downturn, Applicant also attributed his financial 
delinquencies to his lower income as an employee with his taxes withheld. Applicant 
prepared his own income tax returns and has not received any credit or financial 
counseling. While self-employed, Applicant did not pay any installments on his Federal 
income taxes, as required by law. There is no evidence that he set aside any income to 
pay his estimated income taxes. Applicant also testified that increased health insurance 
costs contributed to his financial problems. He testified that his wife was briefly 
hospitalized in about 2012, and the resulting medical expenses were approximately 
$5,000-6,000. He provided no documentary evidence to corroborate any of these claims.7 
 
 Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is approximately $8,600, and his wife’s monthly 
take-home pay is approximately $1,000. Applicant is unable to fulfill his monthly financial 
obligations, and repeatedly has been delinquent on these obligations for several years. 
His checking account reflected a negative balance of approximately $770. Applicant 
claimed to have approximately $200,000 in equity in his residence; however, he had no 
intent to sell the property and had taken no steps to obtain another home-equity loan.8 
 
 Applicant volunteers in support of youth athletics in his community. He is also a 
Sunday school teacher at his church. Applicant’s character and work performance are 
well regarded by his employer.9 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
6 Answer; AE L. 
 
7 Tr. 45-50, 59-60. 
 
8 AE A, D; Tr. 59-60, 76-83. 
 
9 AE G-J. 
 
4 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
  
 Applicant’s six consumer debts totaled approximately $6,700, and his two tax liens 
totaled approximately $43,000. Applicant admitted that his financial problems have 
persisted since about 2009, with an ongoing inability to fulfill his monthly financial 
obligations. The Government did not establish that Applicant failed to file his 2015 Federal 
and state income taxes (SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j.). The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), 19(e), and 19(f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolve or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements 
 
6 
 
 Since about 2009, Applicant has failed to adhere to his financial obligations to pay 
his consumer debts, state income taxes, and Federal income taxes. He provided 
documentary evidence of only one payment towards his delinquent Federal income taxes, 
and he established no payment plan to resolve his Federal tax debt. His checking account 
reflected a negative balance, and he admitted that he repeatedly was delinquent on his 
mortgage, home-equity, and consumer accounts in the last several years. There is no 
documentary evidence of a reasonable debt-resolution plan or significant steps in 
furtherance of such a plan. Applicant did not engage any professional or credit-counseling 
assistance to address his financial and tax problems. Notwithstanding the business 
downturn and medical expenses, Applicant did not demonstrate that he acted responsibly 
in addressing his financial problems. Applicant’s tax problems persisted for several years, 
yet he took no steps to adjust his financial practices, set aside business income to pay 
his taxes, or take other measures to reduce the likelihood of additional tax delinquencies. 
Consequently, his Federal income tax debt has increased to over $300,000. None of the 
financial considerations mitigating conditions applies. Applicant has not demonstrated 
financial responsibility or mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Notwithstanding the favorable record evidence about Applicant’s volunteerism, 
community involvement, character, and work performance, he has not demonstrated 
reliability and good judgment as to his delinquent taxes and consumer debt. I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i.-1.j.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
