 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-01775 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance )  Corrected Copy1 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Revised Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not file his tax returns when due, because he was overwhelmed with 
the constant strain and demands of caring for a special needs child, an elderly parent with 
dementia, and his wife’s serious medical condition. His situation was also negatively 
impacted by unemployment for over a year, which resulted in Applicant having to take a 
job out of state. He resolved his overdue tax filings, paid all outstanding taxes, and hired 
an accountant to help him and his wife prepare their complicated tax returns. This 
favorable evidence and the imposition of easily verifiable conditions fully mitigates the 
heightened security concerns at issue and safeguards national security. A conditional 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On April 26, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant and his wife testified at the hearing. The exhibits offered by the parties were 
                                                          
1 This decision revises the conditions set forth in the original decision issued on August 13, 2018.  
 
2 
 
admitted into the administrative record without objection.2 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on May 4, 2018, and the record closed on May 18, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 60, was first granted a security clearance in 2005. His father served in 
the U.S. Air Force, and Applicant was born near a U.S. military base. Applicant and his 
wife met in college. He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in engineering, while his wife 
holds undergraduate and master’s degrees in engineering. They married over 30 years 
ago, purchased their home in either 1993 or 1994, and had three children. Their oldest 
son died from cancer and their youngest son recently completed his freshman year at a 
top-tier college.3  
 
Applicant’s middle child is autistic. Applicant’s wife left her full-time job when their 
son was diagnosed in elementary school and started her own business, which provided 
her the necessary flexibility to care for their children. Applicant and his wife also hired au 
pairs to help them with raising a special needs child. 
 
Nonetheless, Applicant’s autistic son’s developmental and behavioral issues 
placed great strains and demands on the family. It reached a near breaking point in 2007, 
when their son’s school attempted to place him in a highly-restricted environment. This 
began a highly contentious and long fight with the school to keep their son in a least 
restrictive, mainstream classroom. Applicant and his wife let some of their other 
responsibilities slip, notably, the filing of their income tax returns. They had until then 
prepared and filed their tax returns on their own, but their tax situation had become 
complicated due to Applicant wife’s self-employment and other issues.  
 
In about 2012, Applicant took action to resolve his tax filing delinquency. He hired 
an accountant who prepared and filed their overdue 2007 through 2010 tax returns.4 
However, after resolving these past tax issues, Applicant’s family experienced several 
upheavals. Applicant’s mother-in-law, who suffered from dementia and had, up to that 
point, resided in an assisted living facility, moved in with Applicant and his family. A year 
later, Applicant lost his job. He was unemployed from June 2013 to August 2014, and 
was only able to obtain employment out of state. For the next two years, Applicant worked 
and lived out of state.  
 
In 2016, Applicant’s wife suffered a heart attack and Applicant redoubled his efforts 
to find a job closer to his family. He applied for a position with his current employer, a 
defense contractor, and was hired. He submitted a security clearance application (SCA) 
in connection with the job in March 2016. Applicant self-reported on the SCA his failure 
                                                          
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 4; Applicant’s Exhibits A – C. Department Counsel’s discovery letter and other 
correspondence were marked and are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I and II, respectively. 
On August 6, 2018, I reopened the record to ascertain Applicant’s continued sponsorship at the time of the 
hearing. Appellant remains sponsored for a security clearance. See Appellate Exhibit III. 
 
3 Transcript (Tr.) 10-14, 27-31. 
 
4 Tr. 10-34; Answer; Exhibit 1; Exhibit 2; Exhibit A; Exhibit B. 
 
3 
 
to file his 2012 – 2015 income tax returns, and fully discussed his past tax issues during 
the security clearance process. He hired a certified public accountant (CPA), filed his 
overdue tax returns, and paid all outstanding taxes.  
 
Applicant has retained the CPA to help him prepare and file his tax returns going 
forward. The CPA prepared and filed Applicant’s 2016 and 2017 income tax returns. 
Applicant’s IRS account transcripts for 2016 and his 2017 tax returns reflect that Applicant 
over withheld income taxes from his pay. His federal and state tax refunds for 2016 and 
2017 total nearly $10,000.5  
 
Applicant submitted IRS account transcripts and other documents showing that all 
overdue returns were filed, taxes were paid, and that he recently received a refund from 
the IRS of nearly $19,000. Applicant provided additional documentation showing he 
placed this sizeable tax refund in a separate bank account, because he and his wife are 
uncertain whether they are entitled to the refund for a past tax year.6  
 
In January 2018, Applicant was fired from his full-time position with the defense 
contractor. However, his employer continues to sponsor him for a security clearance. 
Aside from his past tax problems, Applicant has been able to remain relatively financially 
stable. He took out a home equity loan in 2017, which he used to pay his taxes and other 
debts. Credit reports from the three major credit reporting agencies reflect credit scores 
of between 752 and 783.7  
 
Applicant’s coworkers, neighbors, friends, and family submitted letters on his 
behalf. These letters reflect that Applicant is a hard-working, trustworthy, and reliable 
person who freely gives his time to help others. He is active in his children’s lives, 
including volunteering as an umpire when his children played youth sports.8  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 10-34; Answer; Exhibit 1; Exhibit 2; Exhibits A – C. 
 
6 Tr. 34-36; Exhibits A – C. 
 
7 Tr. 37; Exhibit 2; Exhibit B; Appellate Exhibit III. 
 
8 Exhibit A. 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
The Directive sets forth an administrative judge’s authority, responsibilities, and 
obligations. A judge must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the needs for 
the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an 
administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).9 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
                                                          
9 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct or issue. 
ISCR Case No. 17-02952 (App. Bd. Aug. 3, 2018); ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). 
Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct or issue raises a security concern, it can only 
be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-
02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information.10  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.11 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file . . . or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): . . . there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
                                                          
10 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. November 7, 2013) (discussing predictive nature of 
security clearance adjudications). See also Palmieri v. United States, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 20477, * 8 
(D.C. Cir. July 24, 2018) ("Egan holds that ‘the grant of security clearance to a particular employee, a 
sensitive and inherently discretionary judgment call, is committed by law to the appropriate agency of the 
Executive Branch.’ . . . The idea is that ‘an outside non-expert body,’ including a court, is institutionally ill 
suited to second-guess the agency's ‘[p]redictive judgment’ about the security risk posed by a specific 
person.”) (citing to and quoting from Egan, 484 U.S. 527, 529). 
 
11 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
 In a Guideline F case, an administrative judge examines the way a person handles 
his or her personal financial obligations to attempt to discern how they may handle their 
security obligations. Here, Applicant’s security clearance eligibility was called into 
question because he did not timely file his tax returns for a number of years and incurred 
a sizeable tax debt. An applicant’s failure to timely file his or her income tax returns and/or 
pay taxes raises heightened security concerns about the person’s judgment and ability to 
abide by rules and regulations. This, in turn, requires a judge to closely scrutinize the 
circumstances giving rise to tax-related financial issues and the person’s response to it.12 
 
Applicant’s tax-related financial issues were primarily attributable to matters largely 
beyond his control. He was not trying to evade filing his tax returns or paying his taxes. 
He and his wife, who had been primarily responsible for handling the couple’s finances, 
became overwhelmed due to a succession of substantial matters largely beyond their 
control, starting with their middle child’s developmental issues. Over the past two years, 
Applicant has taken decisive and concrete action to address his tax situation. He hired a 
CPA, filed overdue tax returns, and paid all outstanding taxes. He has retained the CPA 
to help him stay on top of his taxes going forward, and presented documentation showing 
that the CPA prepared and filed his 2016 and 2017 income tax returns. The above-listed 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 In addition to the specific adjudicative guidelines, a judge must also take into 
account factors that are applicable in all cases. These factors are grouped together under 
the all-encompassing umbrella of the whole-person concept.13 I hereby incorporate my 
above analysis and highlight some additional whole-person matters.  
 
Applicant has held a clearance without a security incident or violation since 2005. 
He demonstrated that he can be trusted to self-report potentially adverse information, as 
evidenced by the disclosures he made on his security clearance application. His honesty 
and candor continued throughout the security clearance process and at hearing. Of note, 
Applicant voluntarily provided his IRS account transcripts for tax years 2012 through 
2015. He also voluntarily provided his IRS account transcript for 2016 and his federal and 
state 2017 tax returns – even though these later two tax years were not alleged as a 
security concern in the SOR. Applicant’s candor and cooperation with the security 
clearance process, coupled with the mitigating conditions noted above and the other 
favorable record evidence, reflect positively on his security clearance suitability. 
 
On the other hand, however, Applicant’s failure to timely file his tax returns 
continued for a number of years and he did not file his 2017 tax return until after the 
hearing. In light of the heightened security concerns at issue, I find that the provision of 
                                                          
12 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues:  “A security clearance represents an obligation to 
the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations 
to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s . . . ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
13 See AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
7 
 
additional, easily verifiable security measures is a prudent means through which the 
interests of national security can by fully safeguarded in this case. Accordingly, after 
carefully considering and weighing the financial considerations security concern, as well 
as the facts and circumstances giving rise to said concern and the evidence in this case, 
I find that granting Applicant a conditional security clearance is consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States.14 Specifically, Applicant’s continued 
eligibility is conditioned on the following: 
 
(1) Applicant will submit to his facility security officer (FSO) his federal and state 
income tax returns for the next five years; 
 
(2) Applicant will provide his FSO every six months for the next two years a copy 
of his credit report, providing a written explanation for any negative entries 
appearing on the credit report; 
 
(3) Applicant will immediately report to his FSO any financial issues that could raise 
a security concern, to include any failure to timely file or pay taxes or debts; 
and  
 
(4) Applicant will provide his FSO a copy of this decision, so his FSO can be aware 
of these conditions and, if necessary, report to the Government any failure to 
comply.15 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:     For Applicant 
  
                                                          
14 See SEAD 4, Appendix C (granting DOHA administrative judges the discretionary authority to grant initial 
or continued eligibility for a security clearance, despite the presence of an issue(s) that can be partially but 
not completely mitigated, with the provision of additional security measures). See also Memorandum, 
Director for Defense Intelligence (Intelligence and Security), dated January 12, 2018 (“Appendix C identifies 
authorized exceptions that are to be utilized when making adjudicative decisions to grant initial or continued 
eligibility for access to classified information or to hold a sensitive position . . . Effective immediately, 
authority to grant clearance eligibility with one of the exceptions enumerated in Appendix C is granted to 
any adjudicative, hearing, or appeal official or entity now authorized to grant clearance eligibility when they 
have jurisdiction to render the eligibility determination.”)  
 
15 The above conditions are easily verifiable and place the reporting requirement on the appropriate party, 
namely, Applicant. Although, currently, DOHA administrative judges do not have the authority to compel a 
third party, such as an employer, to monitor a person’s compliance with conditions, such as those set forth 
herein, an FSO has an independent obligation to report to the Government any information raising a security 
concern, including a cleared employees failure to timely file or pay their taxes.  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information 
subject to the additional conditions and safeguards set forth herein. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
