 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04009 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. DeAngelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has several hundred thousand dollars of past-due, unresolved tax debt. 
He admitted that he deliberately failed to disclose that information, as required, on his 
security clearance application. Applicant did not resolve financial and personal security 
concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 22, 2017. On 
December 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 27, 2018,1 and elected to have his case 
decided on the administrative (written) record, in lieu of a hearing. On March 12, 2018, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), 
including documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 27, 2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The SOR 
and the answer (Items 1 and 3) are the pleadings in the case. Item 2 is a procedural 
document. Items 4 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on June 27, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, and ¶ 2.a, without explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He has two prior marriages, and two grown children. He 
has a high school diploma and technical training. He has not previously held a security 
clearance. (Item 4)  
 
 From 1997 to 2013, Applicant owned and operated his own business as a 
videographer and photographer. From February 2013 to July 2013, he worked in that role 
for a company in the aerospace industry. He reported on his SCA that he was terminated 
from that job as retaliation for whistleblowing. Applicant was then unemployed until 
February 2015. He then worked as a technician in the aerospace industry, until April 2016. 
From April 2016 to April 2017, he worked outside the defense industry. He took his current 
position, with his employer and clearance sponsor, in April 2017. (Item 4) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, in June 2017, he disclosed extensive details 
about his job termination in February 2015, and the lawsuit he filed as a result. (Item 4 at 
19-21, 41-42). In answering questions on his SCA about his financial record, he did not 
disclose any delinquent debts or tax liens. (Item 4 at 40) 
 
 During Applicant’s September 2017 background interview, he was confronted with 
his credit report, from July 2017. (Items 5, 6) Applicant’s credit report lists an unreleased 
federal tax lien for $611,000, filed in December 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and an unreleased 
state tax lien for $133,000. (SOR ¶ 1.b) The credit report also lists two small medical 
debts in collection (SOR ¶ 1.c for $300, and ¶ 1.e for $108) as well as a small past-due 
insurance debt (SOR ¶ 1.d for $145). (Items 1, 3, 5, 6) 
 
 Once confronted about them, Applicant explained in his background interview that 
the tax liens arose after he sold a business in 1997. He said he had been unable to make 
payments towards the liens. Applicant believed that the other small debts were related to 
injuries suffered on the job from which he was terminated in 2013. (Item 6)  
                                                          
1 Applicant dated his SOR response “January 27, 2017” by mistake.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 The Government alleged the tax liens (¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) and the three small debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e) as outstanding financial security concerns, since they remain 
unresolved. Applicant admitted the Guideline F allegations without further comment. (Item 
2) He did not respond to the FORM, so he offered no information or documentation to 
mitigate these debts.  
  
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose the two tax liens, both issued in 2008, in answering questions on his SCA about 
financial delinquencies involving enforcement (Item 1 at SOR ¶ 2.a, referencing Item 4 at 
40) Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 2.a without further comment. (Item 2) Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM, so he offered no mitigating information.  
 
 The “enforcement” questions on Applicant’s SCA, as referenced in SOR ¶ 2.a, 
include the following:  
 
Section 26 – Financial Record: Delinquency Involving Enforcement 
Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened to you?  . 
. . In the past seven (7) years, you had a lien placed against your property 
for failing to pay taxes or other debts. . . . [and] You are currently delinquent 
on any Federal debt. . . .2 
 
 Both tax liens alleged were issued in 2008 – more than seven years before 
Applicant submitted his SCA in 2017. SOR ¶ 1.b, a state tax lien, is not a Federal debt. 
That debt need not have been disclosed in either respect. SOR ¶ 1.a, however, is a 
federal tax lien, so it was a Federal debt applicable to this question, and disclosure was 
required.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.3 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”4 
  
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
                                                          
2 Item 1. (The SCA question in SOR ¶ 2.a also references delinquent alimony, child support, and judgments, 
none of which are applicable here).  
 
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
4 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.5 
 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and  
 
(g) . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant owes several hundred thousand dollars in past-due taxes as a result of 
two outstanding tax liens. Three other, much smaller, debts are also unresolved. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) therefore apply. According to Applicant’s interview summary, the tax liens 
relate to the sale of a business in 1997. It is not established that they are for past-due 
income taxes, as required by the specific language of AG ¶ 19(g). AG ¶ 19(g) is therefore 
not established. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 The tax liens at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were issued in 2008. They relate to the sale 
of Applicant’s business, in 1997. Nevertheless, they remain outstanding and unresolved 
delinquent debts. It is well established that an applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence 
a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of 
the Guideline F mitigating conditions.6 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
                                                          
6 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant admitted the financial allegations without further comment. He offered 
no mitigating evidence. No other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations . . . determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b on his June 2017 SCA, in response to certain financial 
questions about enforcement. Both tax liens alleged were issued (“placed against 
[Applicant’s] property”) in 2008 – more than seven years before Applicant submitted his 
SCA in 2017. Thus, Applicant was not required to disclose either tax lien, per the wording 
of the tax lien question alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
However, SOR ¶ 1.a, as a federal tax lien, is a Federal debt. Applicant had a duty 
to disclose it in answer to the question asking if he was “currently delinquent on any 
Federal debt,” as referenced in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed 
to do so. AG ¶ 16(a) therefore applies to Applicant’s failure to disclose SOR ¶ 1.a on his 
2017 SCA. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, a state tax lien, is not a Federal debt. Applicant had no duty to disclose 
it in answering that portion of the financial enforcement questions on his June 2017 SCA. 
Despite Applicant’s unqualified admission to SOR ¶ 2.a, AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply to the 
portion of SOR ¶ 2.a relating to the state tax lien. No other falsifications are alleged.7  
 
 
                                                          
7 Applicant’s SCA also contains the following question: Taxes: In the past seven (7) years, have you failed 
to file or pay Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law or ordinance.” Applicant answered “No,” 
and thereby failed to disclose either the Federal or the state tax lien, both of which were outstanding during 
all of the seven years which preceded Applicant’s June 2017 SCA. (Item 4 at 39) Falsification of that 
question, however, is not alleged in the SOR, and I have not considered it as disqualifying conduct.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth the applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E: 
   
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 2.a without further comment. He offered no mitigating 
evidence. No mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations without further comment. He therefore 
offered no mitigating evidence. He owes several hundred thousand dollars in outstanding, 
unresolved state and federal tax debt. He offered no mitigating evidence, and offered no 
information about his efforts to resolve the debts. Applicant also admitted that he 
 
8 
 
 
deliberately failed to disclose his federal debt, as required, on his SCA. Applicant’s 
finances, taxes, and his lack of candor to the Government remain a security concern. He 
has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
