KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a
case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful
error.  Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge
denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is affirmed. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03931.a1
DATE: 08/13/2018
DATE: August 13, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 17-03931
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On December 13, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On May 23, 2018, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement about his efforts to resolve his financial problems and
documents that were not previously submitted to the Judge for consideration.  Those documents
constitute new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale           
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
