 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04064 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
continued eligibility for a security clearance. Although the personal conduct concerns 
are resolved in Applicant’s favor, he failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by 
his history of financial problems, unresolved delinquent accounts, and illegal use of 
marijuana in 2017. Applicant’s access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations, drug involvement and 
substance misuse, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
consideration. 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on June 8, 2017.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on March 13, 2018. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on March 20, 2018, and indicated that he did not have anything further he 
wished to submit for consideration. The documents appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 58, has worked for his current employer since June 2013. After 
suffering a work-related injury in August 2016, Applicant has been unable to work. 
Applicant receives some disability income. He is currently involved in litigation against 
his employer over his injury.3  
 
 Applicant was previously granted access to classified information sometime 
during his service in the U.S. Coast Guard between 1979 and 1988. He completed his 
most recent security clearance application in December 2016, disclosing a now-
resolved child support arrearage and a $13,712 deficiency balance for a voluntary 
vehicle repossession (SOR ¶ 1.c) that the creditor charged off in January 2013. 
Applicant does not believe he is responsible for the deficiency balance because the car 
unexpectedly stopped working. He has not provided any evidence that he initiated a 
formal dispute with the creditor, only that he has chosen not to pay it. Applicant 
indicated that he will pay the debt if it is necessary to obtain a security clearance.4 
 
In addition to the disclosures on his security clearance application, the 
background investigation revealed three additional delinquent accounts: a $19,328 line 
of credit charged off in January 2013 (SOR ¶ 1,b); a $10,159 credit card account that 
Applicant stopped paying in November 2012 and was sent to collection in February 
2017 (SOR ¶ 1.d); and a $211 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.e). The investigation also 
revealed that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in November 2012 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). During his May 2017 background interview, Applicant admitted that after 
he completed his security clearance application, he used marijuana in February and 
March 2017 (SOR ¶ 2.a), to help relieve the pain from his work-related injury. Although 
medical marijuana is legal in Applicant’s state of residency, he did not follow the 
procedures for obtaining the drug from a state-licensed dispensary. Instead, he 
obtained the drug illegally from a casual acquaintance. Applicant did not like the side 
effects of the drug and decided not to use it again the in the future. The record does not 
contain any other evidence of illegal drug use.5 
 
                                                          
2 GE 2-3. 
 
3 GE 4, 9.  
 
4 GE 4.  
 
5 GE 3, 5-6. 7, 9.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant blames his financial problems on his inability to work since his August 
2016 work-related injury. His sources of income are short-term disability pay, which 
Applicant states is 5% of his full salary, and money he earns doing odd jobs. While he 
earns enough to pay his rent and other living expenses, he does have enough income 
to pay his creditors. However, it appears that Applicant had financial problems well 
before his 2016 injury. Applicant first filed for bankruptcy in April 1998 and his debts 
were discharged in July 1998. In November 2012, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection, seeking relief from $ 70,000 in debt. The court dismissed the 
petition in March 2013 after Applicant failed to appear for the creditors meeting. 
Applicant did not list the 2012 bankruptcy petition on his security clearance application 
because he did not think he needed to do so. To date, all of the debts alleged in the 
SOR remain unresolved. 6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
                                                          
6 Tr. 7, 9. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.7 
 
The record supports a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations and that he has demonstrated an inability to pay his 
debts.8  Applicant’s current financial problems were caused by an event beyond his 
control, a work-related injury that has left him unable to work; however, this is not 
enough to mitigate the financial considerations concerns. Applicant’s financial problems 
are not isolated to the nearly two years he has been receiving reduced income. He has 
a history of financial problems dating back almost 20 years. He stopped paying the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, totaling $ $43,000, in approximately 2012, 
when he filed for bankruptcy protection. He did not explain why he stopped paying his 
creditors or why he failed to formally dispute the deficiency balance on the voluntary car 
repossession with the creditor. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of 
persuasion and production regarding his financial history.  
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness, because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.9 Applicant’s admissions of 
marijuana use in March and February 2017 establish a prima facie case that he 
engaged in substance misuse, which is disqualifying.10 While Applicant may have had a 
legitimate medical reason for using marijuana, he chose to bypass his state’s regulated 
process and obtained the drug illegally. This disregard of the law reflects negatively on 
Applicant’s security worthiness. Although he stated his intent not to use illegal drugs in 
the future, this does not mitigate the concerns raised by his deliberate decision to 
procure the drug outside of the legal process. None of the available mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
9  See, AG ¶ 24.  
 
10 AG ¶ 25(a). 
 
5 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the financial considerations concerns and the drug 
involvement concerns under the person conduct guideline. However, the underlying 
debt and illegal drug use is sufficient for disqualification under the respective guidelines 
as detailed above. Accordingly, the personal conduct allegations are cumulative and are 
resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ongoing suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet his burden of production and 
persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. Applicant did not provide any 
evidence to show financial rehabilitation or reform. Furthermore, he engaged in 
behavior that showed a disregard of laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGANST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
