KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: While Applicant filed his 2016 Federal income tax return on time, he did so after the
issuance of the SOR.  This record falls short of establishing that Applicant has reformed and
rehabilitated himself so that he will voluntarily comply with the tax filing requirements.  The
Judge’s favorable decision is relying on Applicant’s promise to comply the tax filing
requirements in the future.  A promise to change one’s conduct in the future does not constitute
evidence of reform and rehabilitation that requires a favorable security clearance decision. 
Given the lack of evidence of reform and rehabilitation, questions remain about whether
Applicant has demonstrated the judgment, reliability, and willingness to abide by well-
established rules and regulations that is required for granting a security clearance. Favorable
decision reversed.
CASENO: 17-01256.a1
DATE: 08/03/2018
DATE: August 3, 2018   
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-01256
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
11, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 23, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant has been working for his current employer since 2012 and is seeking a security
clearance in connection with that employment.  The sole SOR allegation asserts that Applicant failed
to file, as required, his Federal income tax returns for 2012 through 2015.  He admitted the SOR
allegation.  He acknowledges his mistake in not filing his tax returns in a timely manner and is
remorseful.  He was not sure how to include information about the sale of a house on his tax return
and put off filing his tax returns.  In early 2016, he hired a tax accountant to prepare his tax returns. 
He learned his 2012 Federal tax return was actually filed on time.  The other tax returns in question
have been filed.  Due to the filing delays, he is not eligible to receive some of the refunds that he
otherwise would have been entitled.  He understands that he must file his tax returns on time in the
future.  
The Judge’s Analysis
“By not fulfilling his legal obligation to file his income tax returns, Applicant has not
demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability required to hold a security clearance.” 
Decision at 5.  “He also understands that going forward he must always comply with the annual tax
filing obligation  . . .  and that his chronic history of not filing in the past, must never occur again.” 
Id.
Discussion
Department Counsel argues that the record in this case does not support the Judge’s
favorable mitigation and whole-person analysis.  More specifically, he contends that the Judge did
not consider important aspects of the case and her analysis runs contrary to the weight of the record
evidence.  Department Counsel’s arguments have merit. 
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
2
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371, U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”   Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02322 at
3 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2018).
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  Id.
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, reliability, and
willingness to comply with legal obligations.  Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union, Local 473
v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).  Failure to comply with
Federal tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established
government rules and regulations.  Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for
protecting classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018). 
In this case, Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns in a timely manner for three
years.1  As the Judge noted in her decision, these failures to comply with Federal tax laws raise
questions about whether Applicant has demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability that
is required for granting an individual access to classified information.  Id.  The burden was on
Applicant to mitigate such security concerns arising from his admitted tax filing deficiencies. 
Directive E3.1.15. 
 
1 In the appeal brief, Department Counsel points out the Applicant also filed his 2012 Federal income tax return
a month late, but does not specifically claim the Judge erred in her findings regarding the filing of that tax return.  Appeal
Brief at 4-5.  
3
Department Counsel argues that the Judge did not explain how any of the mitigating
conditions applied.  In the decision, the Judge noted that five mitigating conditions (Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG) 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(g))2 were potentially applicable, but did not
identify any of those mitigating conditions as actually applying in her analysis.  Department Counsel
argues that the Judge apparently relied mostly upon mitigating condition 20(g) because much of the
her mitigation analysis is predicated upon Applicant having filed his delinquent tax returns.3
Applicant admits that he failed to file his 2013 though 2015 Federal income tax returns as
required.  Department Counsel points out that, in his security clearance application, Applicant
estimated that he owed $3,000 in past-due taxes for 2013 and 2014 and explained the tax filing
delinquencies by stating, “I got distracted with work and a bit lazy with life and forgot to file my
federal taxes.”  Item 3 of the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  While the Judge found that
Applicant hired a tax accountant in early 2016, the record evidence does not support the Judge’s
finding about that date.  Applicant’s background interview of December 2016-January 2017 reflects
that he stated he intended to hire a tax professional once he received his 2016 W-2 statement in
January or February 2017.  FORM Item 4.  The tax accountant’s bill reflects that Applicant put
down a deposit for his services in March 2017.  FORM Item 2.  Consequently, more than a year
expired after Applicant submitted his security clearance application and underwent his background
interview before he hired the tax consultant to prepare the delinquent tax returns.  FORM Items 2-4. 
His delinquent tax returns were filed in July 2017, after the SOR was issued.  Department Counsel
notes that Applicant’s 2015 Federal income tax return was filed 15 months late, his 2016 tax return
was 27 months late, and his 2013 tax return was 39 months late.  He submitted an extension for
2 Directive Encl. 2, App. A ¶¶ 20(a)-(d) and (g), set forth these mitigating conditions as follows:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization
by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and
credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts; [and]
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and
is in compliance with those arrangements.
3 While this case was pending before the Board, we issued a decision in another case with some overlapping
issues.  In both cases, Department Counsel made arguments regarding mitigating condition 20(g).  We do not agree with
some of Department Counsel’s arguments for reasons we laid out in detail in the prior case.  See, ISCR Case No. 17-
01213, at 4, n.2.  
4
filing his 2016 Federal income tax return and that return was filed during the extension period. 
FORM Response.   
In ISCR Case No. 17-01807 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2018), we observed that 
[t]he mere filing of delinquent tax returns or the existence of a payment arrangement
with an appropriate tax authority does not compel a Judge to issue a favorable
decision.  As with the application of any mitigating condition, the Judge must
examine the record evidence and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  The timing of corrective action is an
appropriate factor for the Judge to consider in the application of [pertinent 
mitigating conditions]. 
In this case, Applicant attributed his tax filing deficiencies, in part, to laziness and forgetfulness for
which the Judge made no findings of fact.4  Applicant did not resolve his tax filing deficiencies until
after his security clearance was in jeopardy.  As we have previously noted, an applicant who
resolves financial problems after being placed on notice his or her security clearance may be in
jeopardy may lack the judgment and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or
when there is no immediate threat to his own interests.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213, supra,
5.  While Applicant filed his 2016 Federal income tax return on time, he did so after the issuance
of the SOR.  This record falls short of establishing that Applicant has reformed and rehabilitated
himself so that he will voluntarily comply with the tax filing requirements.  In essence, the Judge’s
favorable decision is relying on Applicant’s promise to comply the tax filing requirements in the
future.  As we have previously noted, a promise to change one’s conduct in the future does not
constitute evidence of reform and rehabilitation that requires a favorable security clearance decision. 
Id.  Given the lack of evidence of reform and rehabilitation in this case, questions remain about
whether Applicant has demonstrated the judgment, reliability, and willingness to abide by well-
established rules and regulations that is required for granting a security clearance. 
We conclude that the Judge’s decision failed to consider important aspects of the case and
runs contrary to the weight of the record evidence.  Furthermore, we conclude that the record
evidence, viewed as a whole, is not sufficient to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under
the Egan standard. 
4 The Judge found, “Applicant explained his failure to file his Federal income tax returns was not due to a lack
of means, but rather a failure to complete the required process and paperwork.  (Government Exhibit 2).”  Decision at
2.
5
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
