 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-01478 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Patrick K. Korody, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s drug involvement is mitigated by the passage of time and by the 
likelihood that the positive results of a 2015 drug test were in error. He did not mitigate 
the security concerns about his long history of alcohol abuse and alcohol-related criminal 
conduct. He also failed to mitigate related personal conduct security concerns, as well as 
concerns about his deliberate falsification of a 2015 application for clearance. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On October 21, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for a security clearance required 
for his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On November 9, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline for drug involvement and 
substance misuse (Guideline H), alcohol consumption (Guideline G), criminal conduct 
(Guideline J), and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant timely responded to the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 20, 2018, and convened the requested hearing on 
May 9, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 - 8. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibits (AX) 
A – I; however, AX D was subsequently withdrawn.2 GX 33 and AX C4 were admitted over 
objections. All other exhibits were admitted without objection.  
 
 Four witnesses also testified. The testimony of one of those witnesses was 
presented via AX A, a compact disk containing a recorded interview of the witness by 
Applicant’s lawyer. The recording was played in court and is documented in the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) received on May 17, 2018, at pages 72 – 82. I listened to the recording 
after the hearing and am satisfied that the transcript is an accurate reflection of the 
recording. I admitted AX A without objection by the Government, but have assigned it less 
weight than might be afforded testimony from a witness that was subject to cross-
examination. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 At the close of the record, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by 
withdrawing the allegation at SOR 1.d. I granted the motion and have amended the SOR 
by striking SOR 1.d and deleting reference to SOR 1.d in the cross-allegations at SOR 
3.a and 4.a. (Tr. 141 – 142) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that on September 29, 2015, 
Applicant tested positive for cocaine during a workplace drug test and that he held a 
security clearance at that time (SOR 1.a); that around July 1995, he was arrested for 
possession of cannabis and possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR 1.b); that in about 
November 1994, he was arrested for possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR 1.c); and 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 Tr. 60. 
 
3 Tr. 20 – 23. 
 
4 Tr. 29. 
 
 
3 
 
 
that in 1993, he was arrested for possession of marijuana (SOR 1.d). In response, 
Applicant denied SOR 1.a and 1.d and admitted SOR 2.b and 2.c. (Answer) 
 
 Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that in February 2013, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) (SOR 2.a), after which he was 
ordered to attend DWI school in September 2013 (SOR 2.b). It also was alleged that in 
September 2007, Applicant was charged and found guilty of being drunk in public and 
alcohol consumption/intoxication (SOR 2.c); that in 2005, he was ordered to attend an 
alcohol education class (SOR 2.d); that between April and July 2004 (SOR 2.e), and in 
1998 (SOR 2.k), he received court-ordered alcohol counseling (SOR 2.e); that in October 
2004 (SOR 2.f), October 2002 (SOR 2.g), August 2000 (SOR 2.i), and June 1999 (SOR 
2.j), Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI); that in 
February 2001, he was arrested and charged with being drunk in public (SOR 2.h); and 
that in 1998 (SOR 2.l) and 1997 (SOR 2.m), while serving in the U.S. Navy, Applicant 
received non-judicial punishment (Captain’s Mast) for being drunk and disorderly. In 
response, Applicant admitted all of the Guideline G allegations. (Answer) 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government cross-alleged as criminal conduct the drug-
related conduct in SOR 1.a – 1.d (SOR 3.a). The SOR also cross-alleged as criminal 
conduct the alcohol-related offenses at SOR 2.a – 2.c, 2.f – 2.j, 2.l and 2.m (SOR 3.b). 
Applicant responses to the SOR 1 and 2 allegations are incorporated by reference as his 
responses to SOR 3.a and 3.b. (Answer) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately made false 
official statements when he omitted from his October 2015 e-QIP the drug and alcohol-
related offenses addressed at SOR 1.b – 1.d, 2.a – 2.c, 2.f – 2.j, 2.l and 2.m (SOR 4.a). 
It was further alleged that in 2004, Applicant was denied a security clearance because of 
security concerns about illegal drug involvement, alcohol consumption, and falsifying a 
security clearance application (SOR 4.b). Lastly, the SOR cross-alleged as adverse 
personal conduct the SOR allegations regarding drug use and alcohol consumption (SOR 
4.c). Applicant denied SOR 4.a and admitted SOR 4.b. His responses to the SOR 1 and 
2 allegations are incorporated by reference as his response to SOR 4.c. (Answer)  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR establish those allegations as 
facts. Additionally, I make the following additional findings of fact. Applicant is 41 years 
old and works as an electronics technician for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2006. Applicant has held similar positions with 
different defense contractors since May 2002. He served in the U.S. Navy from January 
1996 until January 2000, when he was honorably discharged. Applicant was married from 
March 2014 until March 2015. (GX 1; GX 6) 
 
 Before he enlisted in the Navy, Applicant was arrested for misdemeanor marijuana 
and paraphernalia possession in 1994, when he was 17, and 1995, when he was 18. He 
avers he has not illegally used or possessed any controlled substance since then. 
(Answer; GX 1; GX 4; GX 5) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In 2015, Applicant applied for work with a new contractor that was winning 
contracts for some of the same work he was doing for his current employer. At the time, 
the new company offered better opportunities and more pay. As part of the hiring process, 
Applicant had to pass a drug test. On September 29, 2015, an employee of that company 
administered the drug test by taking a swab of the inside of Applicant’s mouth. A week or 
so later he was told his sample had tested positive for cocaine. Applicant has adamantly 
denied using cocaine or any illegal substance since his use of marijuana as a teenager. 
When the positive test results came to the attention of his employer through the Joint 
Personnel Adjudications System (JPAS), his employer directed him to submit to another 
drug test. That test produced negative results on October 6, 2015. Two other drug tests 
were negative for illegal substances on October 22 and December 22, 2015. A former co-
worker who also was seeking employment with the new company in September 2015 
also was given a cheek-swab drug test. A few minutes after leaving the new company’s 
office, he was contacted and told a mistake had been made and he needed to return for 
another test. That witness testified that the office where the test was administered was 
disorganized because the staff was still moving in. The witness was a Navy veteran and 
had worked for Applicant’s current employer for nine years before September 2015. He 
had been tested for drugs several times, but always by urinalysis. (Answer; GX 3; AX C; 
Tr. 62 – 71, 89 – 90) 
 
 In May 2002, in connection with his employment with a defense contractor, 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application from which he intentionally withheld 
information material to an assessment of his suitability for a security clearance. 
Specifically, Applicant omitted information about previous drug and alcohol-related 
arrests. The background investigation that ensued from his 2002 SCA, which included a 
signed, sworn statement he gave to a government investigator in July 2002, also revealed 
adverse information about alcohol-related counseling he received. On January 28, 2004, 
Applicant was issued an SOR presenting allegations that raised security concerns under 
Guidelines G, J, and E. On June 29, 2004, a DOHA administrative judge denied 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance. On September 17, 2004, the DOHA Appeal 
Board affirmed the denial. In January 2005, Applicant was fired from his defense 
contractor position because he could not obtain a security clearance. In April 2011, 
Appellant applied for a clearance, and disclosed the information alleged at SOR 2.c, 2.e 
and 2.f. Applicant has held a secret security clearance since 2012. (GX 1; GX; 3; GX 7; 
GX 8) 
 
 Questions in his section 22 of Applicant’s 2015 e-QIP required disclosure of any 
drug or alcohol-related arrests or charges regardless of when they occurred. In response, 
Applicant answered “no,” thereby omitting all of the alcohol-related arrests alleged in the 
SOR 2, as well as the two marijuana possession charges addressed in SOR 1.b and 1.c. 
Elsewhere in the e-QIP (Section 24), he disclosed that he completed court-ordered 
alcohol counseling (SOR 2.e) after his 2004 DUI arrest (SOR 2.f). Further, in Section 25 
(Investigations and Clearance Record), Applicant disclosed, inter alia, the 2004 denial by 
DOHA of his request for clearance, and stated that “I was in a hurry to complete my 
 
 
5 
 
 
paperwork and left out a lot of information. I was young5 and did not take it seriously, a 
decision I recognize now and greatly regret.” As to his omissions from his 2015 e-QIP, 
Applicant stated that he thought the information about his arrests had been “pre-loaded” 
because he had previously discussed his arrests when he was granted a clearance in 
2012, as well as during his first background investigation in 2002. This explanation did 
not account for his disclosure of only a 2004 alcohol counseling associated with his 2004 
DUI. The administrative judge who denied Applicant’s request for clearance in 2004 cited 
Applicant’s excuse that he omitted information from his clearance application because he 
did not remember the dates of those offenses, but knew that he would be able to discuss 
that information in a subsequent subject interview with an investigator. As part of the 
current investigation and adjudication of his request for clearance, Applicant was 
interviewed by a government investigator on February 23, 2016. A summary of that 
interview shows that the investigator repeatedly had to confront Applicant with information 
about arrests and other misconduct after Applicant claimed there was nothing to be 
discussed other than what he had already disclosed. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; GX 6 – 8; Tr. 
108 – 110) 
 
 Applicant has consumed alcohol since he was 12 years old, and alcohol abuse 
was prevalent in his family when he was growing up. His father died in an alcohol-related 
accident and his mother is a recovering alcoholic. Applicant joined the Navy to get away 
from his hometown and those alcohol-related circumstances, but his drinking only 
worsened in the Navy and for several years after he started working in the defense 
industry. As documented in his 2004 denial and in the record evidence in this case, 
Applicant was arrested or charged nine times with alcohol-related offenses between 1997 
and 2013. The first two of those offenses occurred while he was in the Navy and resulted 
in loss of rank, forfeiture of pay, and extra duty. Applicant acknowledged that his drinking 
brought his Navy career to a premature end because he would not be able to advance 
beyond a certain paygrade and would not be allowed to re-enlist. He was twice ordered 
to undergo alcohol evaluation and counseling in the Navy. On at least one occasion, a 
counselor assessed him as being an alcohol abuser. Applicant understood this to mean 
that he was not dependent on alcohol and did not feel a compulsion to drink, but that he 
should not drink because he would drink to excess if he started. He avers he last 
consumed alcohol on Christmas Eve in 2017 and that he intends to abstain from future 
alcohol consumption. At hearing, Applicant testified that he identified as an alcoholic. 
(Answer; GX 2; GX 7; Tr. 93 – 97, 106 – 108, 112 – 128, 131 – 135) 
 
 Applicant’s drinking was at its worst between 2002 and 2006. He estimated that 
he was intoxicated most days during that time. Some of his arrests occurred while he was 
on work-related travel. During that time, he occasionally reported to work hungover 
without any adverse effect on his work, because he was just another member of the work 
crew. Eventually, Applicant assumed more responsibility that required preparation for his 
duties and accountability for the results. Having a hangover became incompatible with 
work and, after he was charged and found guilty of public intoxication while on travel for 
                                                 
5 Applicant was 26 years old at the time. 
 
 
6 
 
 
work in 2007, Applicant made an effort to reduce his drinking. Nonetheless, in September 
2013, he was arrested and charged with DUI. Applicant agreed to plead guilty to a lesser 
charge of reckless driving. He was ordered to complete alcohol counseling, after which 
he was referred to additional counseling. He did not receive a diagnosis as a result of that 
counseling. (Answer; GX 2; GX 4; GX 5; Tr. 121 – 128) 
 
 Applicant’s September 2013 arrest occurred the day he returned from a four-month 
overseas work assignment. He went to a local bar with a person who testified at this 
hearing about the events of that day (hereinafter “Witness”) to see other friends and 
claims he did not intend to drink and drive. To that end, Witness agreed to act as a 
designated driver and drove Applicant in his truck to the bar. Their plan was that Applicant 
would stay at Witness’s house at the end of the evening. Applicant had several drinks 
and was intoxicated when they left the bar, but Witness did not drink at the bar. On their 
way back to Witness’s house, they stopped at a house in Witness’s neighborhood where 
mutual acquaintances had gathered to remember someone who had just died. The cars 
of those attending were parked along both sides of the street in front of the house. Alcohol 
was being served at this gathering, and both Applicant and Witness consumed alcohol 
there. When they left, Applicant’s truck would not start and needed a jump start. Witness 
walked to his house, retrieved his vehicle and jump started Applicant’s truck. Witness left 
Applicant with the truck, drove home and returned a short time later. When Witness 
returned, police had arrived and Applicant was being arrested.  
 
 Witness and Applicant testified that as Witness was leaving, he collided with 
Applicant’s truck causing only minor damage. People in the house where the memorial 
gathering was held had called the police after hearing a collision. A police report of the 
incident shows that an off-duty police officer attending the gathering saw “a pickup truck 
spinning tires and back out of the driveway, bumping into a parked car across the street.” 
That person identified Applicant as the driver of the pickup truck. The officer who 
responded determined that Applicant had been drinking and administered a breathalyzer 
test that showed Applicant had a .209 blood alcohol content, more than twice the legal 
limit for that jurisdiction. He subsequently arrested Applicant, charging him with DUI and 
damage to property. Applicant eventually pleaded guilty to reckless driving but still had to 
complete court-ordered alcohol counseling. (Answer; GX 2; GX 4; GX 5; AX A; AX B; Tr. 
72 – 82, 97 – 103) 
 
 Applicant claims he only drank in moderation between September 2013 and 
Christmas Eve 2017. He had attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) in conjunction with 
court-ordered counseling after some of his arrests, and he attended AA sporadically on 
his own. He has no record of having engaged in AA or other recovery program on any 
consistent basis. Applicant claims his personal circumstances have changed since 2013, 
in that he no longer associates with people who drink to excess. He lives quietly and 
adheres to a lifestyle supportive of sobriety. As one indicator of his lifestyle, he presented 
a credit report that shows he has an excellent credit score. Applicant believes attending 
to his personal finances in a responsible way would not be possible if he was living as he 
had in the past. His personal and professional recommendations uniformly laud him for 
 
 
7 
 
 
his hard work, his technical expertise and leadership, and his overall reliability and 
trustworthiness. Applicant has received two meritorious promotions in the past three 
years, and his performance evaluations since 2008 have been superior. Aside from the 
two alcohol-related UCMJ infractions, his performance in the Navy was also above 
average. (Answer; AX E – I; Tr. 35 – 71) 
 
Policies 
  
 DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines issued by the Director of 
National Intelligence on December 10, 2016, and made effective for all adjudications on 
or after June 8, 2017. Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and material 
information,6 and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(d) of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, 
those factors are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access 
                                                 
6 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
8 
 
 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
  The security concern about Applicant’s involvement with illegal drugs is stated at 
AG ¶ 24: 
 
  The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
  Appellant’s pre-employment drug screening test in 2015 was positive for cocaine. 
Additionally, he was arrested for misdemeanor possession of marijuana and related 
paraphernalia as a teenager. Applicant presented sufficient information that calls into 
question the validity of the 2015 drug test. A co-worker’s experience strongly suggested 
that the drug screening may not have been properly administered. Additionally, Applicant 
took and passed another drug test that showed negative results close on the heels of the 
initial test. Having assessed all of the information probative of whether Applicant tested 
positive for cocaine while holding a security clearance in September 2015, I conclude he 
did not. The allegation at SOR 1.a is resolved in his favor. 
 
  As to SOR 1.b and 1.c, those arrests require consideration of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). By contrast, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant’s illegal drug involvement last 
occurred over 20 years ago and is unlikely to recur. This security concern is mitigated. 
                                                 
 
9 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
9 
 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
  Applicant’s use of alcohol reasonably raised the security concern articulated at AG 
¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Between 1997 and 2013, Applicant was arrested or charged nine times for alcohol-
related offenses. His most recent arrest in 2013 was based on a BAC of .209. Applicant 
has admitted to being intoxicated most days between 2002 and 2006. He has received 
court-ordered or command-directed alcohol counseling at least four times. While he was 
in the Navy, an alcohol counselor advised him that he was an alcohol abuser. Applicant 
was raised in a household where alcohol abuse was prevalent, and at hearing he testified 
that he identifies as an alcoholic and intends to abstain from future alcohol consumption. 
This information requires application of the following AG ¶ 22 disqualifying conditions:  
 
  (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and  
 
  (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 I also have considered the following AG ¶ 23 mitigating conditions as potentially 
applicable on this record: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant claims he moderated his drinking after his 2013 arrest, and that he has 
not consumed alcohol since December 2017. As to his 2013 arrest, he had clearly 
engaged in abusive drinking, as indicated by a BAC more than twice the legal limit. Before 
then, he claims to have moderated his drinking after a 2007 public intoxication charge, 
only to engage in excessive drinking six years later. The security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s long history of alcohol-related problems must be addressed by more than 
claims to sobriety and a change of lifestyle. The passage of five years since his last 
incident is not, in this context, sufficient to support AG ¶¶ 23(a) or 23(b). As to treatment 
and rehabilitation, Applicant was advised almost 20 years ago that he was abusing 
alcohol. Since then, and despite currently identifying as an alcoholic, he has not engaged 
in any sustained and verifiable effort to address his drinking in a way that would inspire 
confidence that he will not repeat his past behavior. Available information does not 
support any of the AG ¶ 23 mitigating conditions, and the security concerns about 
Applicant’s use of alcohol remain unresolved.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
  
 The security concern about criminal conduct is articulated at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 At SOR 1.a, the Government cross-alleged as criminal conduct Applicant’s positive 
drug test in 2015; however, it was not established that Applicant used cocaine in 2015. 
As to the remaining information pertinent to this guideline, available information shows 
that Applicant has a history of criminal conduct that began when he was charged with 
marijuana possession as a teenager. It continued when he joined the Navy and for most 
of the next 20 years through a series of alcohol-related arrests as a civilian. Applicant 
established that the alcohol-related arrest alleged at SOR 2.a and cross-alleged at SOR 
3.b was reduced to a reckless driving charge. Nonetheless, the fact that he had a .209 
BAC and was identified as driving his pickup truck that evening is sufficient to show that 
Applicant was, in fact, driving his vehicle while heavily intoxicated.  
 
 Available information requires application of the following AG ¶ 31 disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
 
 
11 
 
 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 I also have considered the following AG ¶ 32 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last instance of criminal conduct was in 2013. All of his criminal conduct 
since 1998 is alcohol-related. For the same reasons I concluded he has not established 
a sufficient record of reliable sobriety, the five years that have passed since his last arrest 
is not sufficient to establish ¶ 32(a). The evidence that Applicant committed the offenses 
listed is substantial. Without rehabilitation regarding alcohol, there can be no rehabilitation 
with respect to his criminal conduct. The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 32(b) – (d) are 
not applicable based on this record. The security concerns under this guideline are not 
mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is articulated at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
 
 
12 
 
 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 Available information shows that Applicant deliberately withheld from his 2015 e-
QIP information about his arrest record that was relevant and material to an accurate 
assessment of his suitability for a security clearance. This is at least the third time that 
Applicant has been asked to provide such information in a clearance application. In 2004, 
he was denied a clearance, in part, because he withheld information about his arrests. 
When he submitted his 2015 e-QIP, Applicant answered “no” to the same question of 
whether he has ever been arrested or charged with a drug or alcohol-related offense. I 
do not find credible his explanation that he thought such information would be “pre-
loaded” in the questionnaire. In disclosing information about his past investigations for 
clearance, Applicant acknowledged that in 2004 he had not taken the process seriously; 
however, in 2015 he still did not pay sufficient attention to the Government’s need for 
complete and accurate information about his background before he certified that his 
answers were true. The foregoing requires application of the disqualifying condition at 
AG¶ 16(a): 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
 As alleged at SOR 4.b, Applicant was denied a security clearance in 2004 because 
of adverse information about his alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct. The record in this case shows that Applicant has continued the same sort of 
conduct over the 14 years since that denial. Further, the Government alleged at SOR 4.c 
that Applicant’s drug involvement and his history of alcohol-related criminal conduct also 
reasonably raised a broader security concern about Applicant’s overall judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. Because the drug involvement concerns are mitigated, 
that aspect of SOR 4.c is resolved for Applicant. Nonetheless, his use of alcohol and his 
history of alcohol-related misconduct remains a security concern and requires application 
of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c): 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 I also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 As to Applicant’s false statements in his e-QIP, there is no indication he tried to 
correct his omissions. To the contrary, the summary of his most recent subject interview 
with a government investigator shows that he was repeatedly confronted with information 
he had not disclosed when given the opportunity to do so. Additionally, Applicant did not 
show that he sought any guidance about how to complete his e-QIP or what information 
he was required to disclose. His claim that he thought his arrest information was already 
provided in the form is untenable. As to the broader security concerns about his arrests 
and use of alcohol, there is nothing minor about Applicant’s long record of such conduct. 
Applicant did not present sufficient information to show that those aspects of his 
background will not recur and no longer reflect adversely on his judgment. Available 
information does not support application of the above-named AG ¶ 17 mitigating 
conditions. The security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant presented positive recommendations and testimony from current 
and former coworkers, as well as one of his neighbors. They all view Applicant in a 
positive light and recommend that he retain his security clearance. None of them is aware 
of any reason why the Government would not want Applicant to have access to classified 
information. Additionally, Applicant has a solid track record of on-the-job performance 
 
 
14 
 
 
over the past ten years and he has been recognized for his professionalism and expertise. 
Unfortunately, the facts and circumstances that required a denial of his request for a 
clearance in 2004, have continued. Having reviewed the record evidence as a whole, I 
am left with significant doubts regarding Applicant’s use of alcohol and the potential for 
future alcohol-related criminal offenses. More important, Applicant’s omissions of 
important adverse information in his background from his most recent application for 
clearance is especially disconcerting in light of his previous denial of access for similar 
reasons. 
 
 The record evidence as a whole leaves me with doubts that Applicant’s problems 
with alcohol, criminal conduct, and overall personal conduct are behind him. Because 
protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, 
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 
of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 1.d:  Withdrawn 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.m: Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 4, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 4.a – 4.c: Against Applicant 
  
 
 
15 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
