 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01648 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 16, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 5, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 8, 2017, scheduling the hearing for September 27, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4, which 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented 
two documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, and admitted into 
evidence. The record was left open until November 30, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. On November 30, 2017, Applicant offered AppX C, which was also 
admitted into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on October 5, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations of SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 14.) He has been employed with the defense contractor since August of 2016. (GX 
1 at page 14.) He has held a security clearance since about September of 2005. (GX 1 
at page 38.)  Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from 2006~2010. (TR at page 17 
line 4 to page 20 line 14, and GX 1 at page 21, and AppX C at page 3.) He is divorced 
from his former spouse. (See TR at page 28 line 23 to page 31 line 24.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a.  Applicant admits that he was indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
as the result of a tax lien in the amount of about $19,169. While deployed overseas with 
the Air Force, from 2001~2013, Applicant was under the impression that his overseas 
income was excluded from taxation, as long as Applicant filed the appropriate 
documentation with the IRS. (TR at page 20 line 19 to page 26 line 13.) Applicant hired 
an attorney to do those filings. (Id.) Said attorney did not do the required filings; and as 
a result, was prosecuted by the Department of Justice. (TR at page 20 line 19 to page 
26 line 13, and AppX A at page 1.) Applicant has since paid the tax lien, as evidenced 
by documentation from the IRS. (AppX A at pages 2~8.) This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that he owes about $9,275 to Creditor B, as the result of an 
automobile repossession of a vehicle that he co-owned with his former spouse. (TR at 
page 28 line 23 to page 31 line 24.) This past-due debt also appears on Applicant’s 
most recent September 2017 credit report (CR). (AppX B at pages 16 and 22.) Despite 
having been given more than two months after his hearing to address this admitted 
debt, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard. (TR at page 35 line 15 to 
page 36 line 23.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c.  Applicant admits that he owes a past-due debt of about $2,428 to Creditor 
C, as the result of “a timeshare” he co-owned with his former spouse. (TR at page 31 
line 25 to page 33 line 6.) This past due-debt also appears on Applicant’s most recent 
September 2017 credit report (CR). (AppX B at pages 15 and 20.) Again, despite having 
been given more than two months after his hearing to address this admitted debt, 
Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard. (TR at page 36 line 23 to page 37 
line 12.) This allegation is also found against Applicant. 
 
3 
 
 1.d. Applicant avers that he paid an alleged past-due debt to Creditor D in the 
amount of about $162. (TR at page 26 line 16 to page 27 line 13.) This averment is 
supported by Applicant’s most recent September 2017 CR. This allegation is also found 
for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant avers that he paid an alleged past-due debt to Creditor E in the 
amount of about $1,198. (TR at page 27 line 14 to page 28 line 13.) This averment is 
supported by Applicant’s most recent September 2017 CR. This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant avers that he paid an alleged past-due debt to Creditor F in the 
amount of about $119. (TR at page 28 lines 14~22.) This averment is supported by 
Applicant’s most recent September 2017 CR. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant had a significant tax lien, and other past-due debts The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a history of delinquencies. 
Although he has addressed his tax lien and his smaller past-due debts, two admitted 
debts remain outstanding totaling about $11,703. He has not demonstrated that future 
financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has not been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
