  1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 17-03552 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 In a response signed on 
February 5, 2018, he admitted all allegations and requested a determination based on 
the written record. On April 16, 2018, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) with three attachments (“Items”). Applicant offered no response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. Based on my review of the case file 
and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old pipe designer who, following several months of 
unemployment, has worked for the same defense contractor since June 2016. He 
graduated from high school in 2013. Applicant is presently single and has no children.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he used marijuana, an illegal drug, for a period of about 
five years. He started using the drug as a teen in about 2011. He found the drug to be 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
  2 
 
calming, relaxing, and something to do when he was bored. (FORM, Item 3, Interview at 
6) In April 2014, the year after he graduated from high school, he was fired from a fast 
food restaurant for smoking marijuana while on a break from work.  
 
Applicant also admitted buying marijuana with varying frequency from about 
2011 to 2015. He always purchased the drug from friends, usually in amounts costing 
about $20. He generally used the drug with friends or his brother. Applicant’s marijuana 
use was known by his parents, family, and friends. (FORM, Item 3, Interview at 6)  
 
In his SOR Response, (at FORM, Item 1) Applicant wrote that he quit using the 
drug after this 2014 incident; elsewhere (at FORM, Item 3, Interview) it is noted that he 
told an investigator that he ceased using the drug in “late 2015.” He quit using 
marijuana as he began thinking about his future. He told an investigator in September 
2017 that he has no intention of using the drug again.  
 
 The facts concerning his marijuana use became further complicated when he 
completed his March 2016 security clearance application (SCA). In that document, 
Applicant answered “no” in response to: 
 
Section 13C – Employment Record – Have any of the following 
happened to you in the last 7 years at employment activities that you 
have not previously listed . . . . Fired from a job? Quit after being told you 
would be fired? Have you left a job by mutual agreement following 
charges or allegations of misconduct? Left a job by mutual agreement 
notice of unsatisfactory performance? Received a written warning, been 
officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the 
workplace, such as a violation of security policy? 
 
Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity: Illegal Use of 
Drugs or Controlled Substances – In the last 7 years, have you 
illegally used any drugs or controlled substances? Use of a drug or 
controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, 
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any drug or controlled 
substance? 
 
Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity: Illegal Drug 
Activity – In the last seven (7) years, have you been involved in the 
illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, 
shipping, receiving, handling or sale of any drug or controlled substance? 
 
 Applicant did not report his marijuana use on his March 2016 SCA for two 
reasons. First, he thought “it was no big deal” and because “marijuana use is now legal 
in [his home state] and was decriminalized.” (FORM, Item 3, Interview at 6) Second, he 
“feared his past drug use would disqualify him from employment opportunities.” (FORM, 
Item 3, Interview at 6) 
 
 
 
  3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions for evaluating an applicant’s eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. They are to be applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of variables comprising the “whole-person concept.” All available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision must be considered. The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt concerning 
a candidate will be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends beyond 
normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in 
those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may fail to safeguard such information.  
 
Analysis 
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant admitted he used and purchased marijuana with varying 
frequency from approximately 2011 to 2015. He also admitted that he was terminated 
from a job in about April 2014 for smoking marijuana on a work break. Moreover, he 
admitted concealing his past drug use by answering “no” to three SCA questions 
inquiring about his employment record and past illegal drug use occurring in the 
preceding seven years.  Therefore, the following disqualifying condition applies:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
  4 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts;  
 
AG ¶ 17(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of 
a person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The disqualifying condition potentially applicable here would be AG ¶ 17(c), AG ¶ 
17(d), and AG ¶ 17(e). Here, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because the use of an illegal 
drug is a serious matter. Applicant’s past drug use might have been mitigated and 
dismissed as a youthful indiscretion. However, the fact that he does not remain 
consistent as to his quit date for drug use is particularly troubling, as is the fact that he 
purposefully endeavored to conceal his past drug use as recently as his 2017 
investigative interview. Such issues sustain doubts related to his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. The fact Applicant failed to provide documentary 
evidence of counseling or other positive steps taken to help assure that he remains 
drug-free going forward obviates application of AG ¶ 17(d). At best, AG ¶ 17(e) applies 
in part because Applicant now seeks to correct and amend the record by providing the 
truth regarding the allegations raised. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
  5 
 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. The ultimate determination of whether 
to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 24-year-old high 
school graduate currently working as a pipe designer. A bachelor with no children, he 
started using marijuana in secondary school. A year after high school graduation, he 
was fired from a service industry position after he was caught using marijuana on a 
work break. He sought to conceal both his dismissal and his drug use when answering 
relevant questions on his March 2016 SCA. As well, he has provided inconsistent 
answers indicating that he stopped using the drug either after his 2014 dismissal or in 
late 2015.  
 
Had Applicant honestly volunteered the truth regarding his firing and drug use, 
this decision may have ended differently. Under these circumstances, however, 
insufficient time has passed for him to demonstrate his ability to abstain from drugs. 
Moreover, in light of the evidence offered, insufficient time has passed to demonstrate 
the appropriate candor and reliability expected from one granted a security clearance. 
Personal conduct security concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
