 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03048 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant incurred numerous misdemeanor criminal and traffic offenses from 
2006 to July 2016. Her most recent charge was for driving while intoxicated. She pled 
guilty to driving under the influence, and remains on probation for that offense until 
about May 2020. Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate the criminal 
conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 2, 2016. 
On September 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 4, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was initially assigned to another administrative judge, who scheduled the hearing 
for February 27, 2018. The day before the hearing, Applicant requested a continuance, 
which was granted. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. On March 23, 
2018, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 26, 2018. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. 
 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant and one other witness testified. She did not 
submit any exhibits. I held the record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional documentation after the hearing. Applicant timely submitted four documents, 
which were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE D, and admitted without 
objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 8, 2018. The record 
closed on June 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.n.2 Her admissions and other comments are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She has never married and has no children. She has a 
general equivalency diploma (GED) and has taken some college courses. At the time of 
the hearing, she was living at home with her parents. Since October 2015, she has 
worked in the property inventory office of her employer, a defense contractor. She earns 
$15 an hour and has no other jobs. She has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 11-12, 
27-31, 49-51; GE 1; AE C) 
 
 Between May 2006 and July 2016, Applicant incurred numerous misdemeanor 
criminal charges and traffic citations. These include two charges of assault on a family 
member, in 2006 and 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.m); failure to appear at a court hearing, 
in 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a); littering (2007) (SOR ¶ 1.b);3 marijuana possession, in 2009 (SOR 
¶ 1.f); destruction of property, in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.l);4  and driving while intoxicated (DWI), 
in July 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.n). She has also incurred three citations for having an expired car 
inspection sticker, in 2007, 2008, and 2012 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.k); and seven citations 
                                                          
1 AE A concerns Applicant’s completion of her alcohol safety awareness program (ASAP); AE B is a 
Compliance summary from the Department of Motor Vehicles; AE C is an academic transcript. AE D is a 
character letter.  
 
2 Due to an oversight, Applicant did not answer SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.l in her SOR response, but she admitted 
those allegations during the hearing. (Tr. 14-15) 
 
3 Tr. 33; GE 1 at 36; GE 3.  
 
4 SOR ¶ 1.l lists this offense as occurring in June 2012. In fact, it occurred in March 2014 (GE 1 at 38; GE 
2; GE 3 at 23) 
 
 
3 
 
for speeding, all between 2007 and July 2016 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 
1.n). (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3)  
 
 Applicant testified that the expired inspection citations were due to 
absentmindedness. She testified that the speeding tickets all occurred at the same spot 
on an interstate highway, and that she got them all while driving to work. At some point, 
she was placed on a six-month probationary driver improvement program. (Tr. 34-35; 
52-53) 
 
 In May 2006, Applicant and her boyfriend got into an argument. He spat in her 
face, and she hit him in the shoulder. Applicant was argumentative when the police 
arrived. She was arrested and charged with assaulting a family member. She 
inadvertently missed a court date, so she was charged with failure to appear (FTA). The 
assault charge was dismissed, but she was found guilty of FTA. (SOR ¶ 1.a) (Tr. 32-33) 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant was pulled over by the police. A police dog detected 
marijuana in the car. Applicant said the marijuana “had been sitting in my house.” She 
was “on my way to get rid of it, give it away” when she was pulled over. (Tr. 33-34) She 
was charged with marijuana possession, first offense. Disposition was deferred, and 
she completed a substance abuse education program. (SOR ¶ 1.f) Applicant disclosed 
on her SCA that she used marijuana about once every six months between about 
January 2002 and March 2010 (she meant 2009, as she testified that she did not use 
marijuana after her arrest). (Tr. 54-55) 
 
 In March 2014, Applicant was renting a room from someone. She testified she 
had a lot of animosity towards him, because he had assaulted her, and she had to get 
ten stitches near her eye. (Tr. 36) At some point, the individual called her and asked to 
meet:   
 
I forgot why he wanted me to meet him. His house had caught fire, and he 
was staying at a hotel. He wanted me to meet him there, and he said he 
had stuff of mine in his truck. When I got there, the truck was locked, my 
stuff was in there. He wasn’t answering his phone. And it was stupid. . . . I 
just put a scratch on it [the door of the truck].5 
 
 Applicant was charged with misdemeanor destruction of property valued at less 
than $1000. The charge was dismissed. (SOR ¶ 1.l) Applicant acknowledged her 
wrongdoing: (“That was uncalled for. I shouldn’t have done that.”) (Tr. 37) 
 
 In May 2015, Applicant and her cohabitant/fiancé had a heated argument. “I said 
some things that really upset him, and he grabbed me, and I grabbed him back. We 
kind of got into a little scuffle.” Someone called the police, and Applicant was arrested 
and charged with assault on a family member. (SOR ¶ 1.m). Her fiancé acknowledged 
his part in the incident, and had the charge dismissed in court. (Tr. 37-38; GE 1 at 39) 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 35-36. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant began working at her current job in October 2015. She submitted her 
SCA in January 2016. She disclosed her criminal offenses up to that point, including the 
offenses at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.l, and 1.m. (GE 1)  
 
 In July 2016, Applicant was still living with her fiancé. They had gone out to 
dinner, and had some drinks before going home. Applicant was having a glass of wine 
at home when she received a call from a former cohabitant. He was at a bar in a 
neighboring town, and had called Applicant because he was too drunk to drive himself 
home. Applicant finished her glass of wine, and got in the car to go get him. (Tr. 39-40) 
 
 When Applicant picked the man up, he was inebriated and combative during the 
drive home. Applicant “got a little aggravated and started speeding.” A police car was 
following her, and pulled her over. The officer “could smell the liquor coming off my 
passenger because he smelled like a brewery.” (Tr. 39) Applicant failed a field sobriety 
test and blew a blood-alcohol level of 0.10 on a breathalyzer. (Tr. 40) 
   
 Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI-first offense, and reckless 
driving/speeding. In January 2017, she pleaded nolo contendre (no contest) in her 
state’s general district court. She appealed to her state’s circuit court, and in May 2017, 
she pleaded guilty to driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). The reckless 
driving/speeding charge was nolle prossed. (Tr. 40-42; GE 3 at 26-27, 29) 
 
 Applicant was sentenced to 360 days in jail, 350 days suspended. An ignition-
interlock device was placed on her car, and her driver’s license was restricted.6 She 
was ordered to attend an alcohol safety awareness program (ASAP), fined and ordered 
to pay court costs. She was also sentenced to three years of unsupervised probation. 
(SOR ¶ 1.n) (Tr. 42-47) 
 
 Applicant served the jail time on weekends. She completed the ASAP program in 
September 2017. The ignition-interlock device was removed from her car in mid-
January 2018. Applicant’s full driving privileges were reinstated in May 2018. (AE A; AE 
B) She remains on unsupervised probation (“good behavior”) until May 2020. (Tr. 45-47) 
Applicant is not allowed to consume alcohol while on probation. She considers that a 
speeding ticket would violate her “good behavior” requirement. (Tr. 47)  
 
 Applicant no longer lives with her former fiancé, and she has moved back in with 
her parents. (Tr. 50-51) She is now in a relationship with someone who does not drink. 
(Tr. 57-58) She no longer goes out to drink. She has taken up other pastimes, such as 
painting and drawing. She has resumed pursuing her education, though she is not 
currently in school. Applicant is also seeing a professional counselor. Applicant’s DWI 
was a wake-up call for her. She is more conscious now of the need to slow down and to 
be a defensive driver. She wants to have a more positive future and is continuing to 
work to change her behavior. (Tr. 57-60) 
 
                                                          
6 Applicant could only drive to court, school, work, and to medical appointments. (Tr. 43) 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s father is retired from the U.S. military, and currently works as a DOD 
civilian. He has had a clearance for many years. He encouraged Applicant to be 
“brutally honest” in disclosing her record on her SCA. He testified that his daughter has 
taken time to mature, but he has seen a “remarkable turnaround” in her behavior in 
recent years. (Tr. 62-68) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor for the last two years provided a reference letter. He 
attested to Applicant’s reliability, efficiency, and trustworthiness. She has an increased 
sense of self-awareness since her incident (the DWI). She volunteers to assist others in 
the workplace and is of good moral character. She is thought of as kind and well-liked 
by her co-workers. (AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”8 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
 Between 2006 and July 2016, Applicant incurred numerous misdemeanor 
criminal charges and traffic citations. Her most recent offense was a DWI (pled down to 
DUI). She remains on probation for that offense until May 2020. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(b), and 
31(c) apply.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant has a significant history of failure to comply with the law. Her offenses 
are numerous, frequent, and recent. Several of her charges involve disputes and 
altercations with co-habitants. For now, she is rectifying that by living at home with her 
parents. She has numerous speeding tickets. These citations are minor, but they are 
also numerous and recent, as the latest citation occurred in July 2016. That shows her 
driving issues are not sufficiently in the past to be considered resolved.  
 
 Most troubling is the fact that Applicant’s most recent offense, the July 2016 DWI 
arrest, is also the most serious. That offense also occurred after she submitted her 
SCA, in January 2016. The timing of the offense, and its seriousness, weighs heavily 
against a finding that Applicant is fully rehabilitated.  
 
 It is not surprising that Applicant’s DWI offense (pled down to DUI) resulted in a 
lengthy probation term. She gets some credit under AG ¶ 32(d) for being in compliance 
with her probation requirements without incident. She is also credited with an excellent 
employment record, and with pursuing her education.  
 
 Nevertheless, Applicant had only completed one year of the three-year 
probationary period when the record closed. She remains on probation until May 2020. 
She has not established that her criminal behavior happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur, or that it does not cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) does apply, and AG ¶ 32(d) only partially 
applies, as noted above. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(c):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
8 
 
Applicant credibly testified that she was remorseful for her actions. She 
recognizes the significance of her conduct. She testified credibly that her most recent 
arrest was a wakeup call and that she is working to improve her behavior, her driving, 
and her compliance with the law. But she remains on probation for her DUI offense for 
almost another two years. More time is needed for her to establish a track record of 
maturity, good judgment, impulse control, and compliance with the law without further 
incidents before she can be considered a suitable candidate for access to classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
