 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00271 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F. On April 
20, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
On April 20, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me. On May 2, 2018, DOHA issued a notice of video 
teleconference hearing scheduling the hearing for May 22, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
N, which were admitted without objection. I held the record open until June 1, 2018 to 
afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE O through W, which were admitted without objection.   
 
2 
 
 
On June 6, 2018, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). On June 12, 
2018, I informed both parties that after due consideration, I intended to issue a 
summary decision in favor of the Applicant. On June 13, 2018, Department Counsel 
objected to a summary decision. 
 
On July 19, 2018, Applicant submitted an email and letter, marked as AE X, in 
which he inquired about the status of his case. Among other things, he also expressed 
remorse and provided assurances that he had addressed the underlying issues that 
led to his failure to file his taxes. AE X was admitted over Department Counsel’s 
objection.  
   
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old test technician employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2016. He seeks to retain his security clearance as a condition of his 
continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 10-12)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2005, and attended community 
college, but did not earn a degree. He served in the Air National Guard (ANG) from 
2005 to 2013, and was honorably discharged as a staff sergeant (pay grade E-5).  
While Applicant was in the ANG, he was deployed to the Middle East for five months. 
While in the ANG, he held a security clearance. (GE 1; AE P, AE Q; Tr. 12-15, 18) 
Applicant has never married and has no dependents. (GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits two allegations that he failed to file 
timely his state and Federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 to 2015. These 
allegations are also corroborated through the Government’s exhibits. (GE 1 – 2) 
 
Applicant has since filed all of his state and Federal returns that were in 
arrears. He attributed the delay in filing his tax returns to the chaos leading up to and 
following his discharge from the military, a cross-country move, and unemployment. 
(SOR Answer) Around the time Applicant was reaching the end of his obligated 
military service, two major events had an adverse impact on him. First, his long-term 
relationship with his girlfriend ended in 2013. Second, in the timeframe of 2014 to 
2015, his father was involved in a serious motorcycle accident and he later had a 
heart attack. (Tr. 15-16, 22-23)  
 
Applicant’s post-military adjustment to civilian life did not go well either. 
Following his discharge, he worked as a sales associate at a low-paying job near 
home. Hoping to improve his employment prospects, he moved to another state, but 
was unable to find a job and was unemployed from February 2014 to January 2015. 
(GE 1) The combination of these setbacks caused Applicant to lose focus and he let 
the filing of his tax returns lapse. (Tr. 18) At no time was Applicant’s failure to file his 
tax returns motivated by a desire to avoid paying his taxes. (Tr. 19)  
 
3 
 
 
 
When Applicant completed his January 29, 2016 security clearance application 
(SF-86), he self-reported his tax issues. (GE 1) During his June 20, 2016 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he openly discussed 
his tax issues with the investigator. He stated, “he was unsure of what to do and could 
not afford professional tax help due to sporadic employment.” Applicant added that, 
“he will seek professional tax help within the year.” (GE 2) These two self-reporting 
events of his tax problems occurred before his SOR was issued on February 17, 2017.  
 
Following through on his commitment to the OPM investigator to seek 
professional help and file his back taxes, he filed his 2013 state and Federal tax 
returns on May 25, 2017, and filed his 2014, 2015, and 2016 state and Federal tax 
returns on April 10, 2017. Applicant received state and Federal tax refunds for tax 
returns filed for 2013 through 2015. He experienced delays in getting the necessary 
documentation to file his back taxes. (Tr. 18-21; AE A – L)  
 
Applicant asked the Government to forgive him for his mistake and noted that 
he had done everything he could to correct his tax situation. This has been a sobering 
experience for Applicant and he understands the importance of timely filing his tax 
returns. All of Applicant’s state and Federal tax returns are current. (SOR Answer; Tr. 
19, 22; GE 2; AE X)  
 
 Department Counsel thoroughly questioned Applicant on the tax issues. 
Applicant never wavered in his responses nor did he give any indication that he was 
being untruthful. Having had a chance to observe Applicant’s demeanor and listen to 
his testimony, I found him to be credible and sincere regarding the circumstances that 
led up to his failure to file taxes. That said, it is clear that this experience has made an 
impression on Applicant and it is unlikely that he will ever fall behind on filing his taxes 
in the future. (SOR Answer; Tr. 20-23; AE O, AE X)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted his two most recent performance evaluations that reflect 
above average performance and document his contribution to the national defense. 
(AE O; AE R - T) Applicant also submitted two work-related reference letters and one 
personal reference letter. Two co-workers view him as a valued employee. His 
personal reference has known him for over 15 years. All three references describe 
Applicant as trustworthy, dedicated, and hard working. All three references 
recommend Applicant for a security clearance. (AE D - H) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
4 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security 
decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
  
  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes one disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(f) failure to file . . . annual Federal, 
state . . . income tax returns . . . as required.” Applicant did not timely file his state and 
Federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 to 2015. The record established AG ¶ 
19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Under these facts, application of AG ¶ 20(a) initially appears limited because 
three years of state and Federal income tax returns are at issue, and Applicant’s tax 
filing issues have been ongoing until recently. Having regained his footing following 
the breakup of a long-term relationship, his concern over his father’s motorcycle 
accident and subsequent heart attack, and the uncertainty of a lengthy unemployment, 
Applicant has filed all three years of his delinquent returns. Applicant is aware of his 
requirements to file his state and Federal tax returns and promised to file all required 
tax returns on time, as required. Consequently, I find AG ¶ 20(a) fully applies and AG 
¶ 20(b) applies in part.  
 
Moreover, Applicant was genuinely contrite over his laxity and oversight. He 
took appropriate corrective action. Evidence of his state and Federal tax return filings 
was introduced. He received refunds from state and Federal tax authorities for all 
three years in question. In the future, he will be mindful of his obligation to file his tax 
returns timely. The situation is now under control and AG ¶ 20(g) applies.  
 
 Applicant became overwhelmed with a series of life events and fell behind on 
filing his state and Federal tax returns for three years. The DOHA Appeal Board has 
commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. 
 
7 
 
 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we have noted in the past, a clearance 
adjudication is not directed at collecting debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By the same token, neither is it 
directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a 
proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. 
Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does 
not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & 
Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 
(D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See 
ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 
18, 2015). The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [the applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] 
is now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful 
consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding 
prior behavior evidencing irresponsibility,” including a failure to timely file federal 
income tax returns. See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 
2016)  
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2016), the Appeal Board 
reversed the grant of a security clearance, and noted the following primary relevant 
disqualifying facts:  
 
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return in December 2013 
and received a $2,074 tax refund. He filed his 2012 Federal tax return in 
September 2014 and his 2013 Federal tax return in October 2015. He 
received Federal tax refunds of $3,664 for 2012 and $1,013 for 2013. 
 
Notwithstanding the lack of any tax debt owed when the tax returns were filed in ISCR 
Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board provided the 
following principal rationale for reversing the grant of a security clearance, “By failing 
to file his 2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, 
Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information.” ISCR Case No. 15-
01031 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2016) (citations omitted).  
 
On June 8, 2017, the new AGs went into effect.  When completing his security 
clearance application in January 2016 and during his June 2016 OPM PSI, Applicant 
self-reported his failure to file his state and Federal tax returns for tax years 2013 to 
2015. He stated during his OPM PSI that he would seek professional help and file 
those returns within the year. He followed through on his promise and in April and May 
2017, Applicant “made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file [all 
 
8 
 
 
required federal income tax returns].” AG ¶ 20(g). Taking into account his credibility, 
contrition, and understanding of his responsibilities, there is sufficient assurance that 
his financial problems are resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline F are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old test technician employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2016. He served honorably for eight years in the Air National Guard and 
deployed to the Middle East for five months during his military service. He successfully 
held a security clearance during his military service and while working as a defense 
contractor. His employer values him as an employee and supports him for a security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant recognizes the importance of filing his state and Federal tax returns. 
Following a series of adverse life events, he fell short of those requirements for three 
years, but once he regained his footing, he addressed the problem. Noteworthy is the 
fact he self-reported his failure to file his tax returns and he filed them within the 
timeframe promised during his OPM PSI. Applicant does not question the importance 
of timely filing his tax returns. He expressed a significant level of contrition, filed the 
three years of state and Federal back tax returns and received refunds for all three 
years. He is current on the filing of all of his income tax returns. I agree with 
Applicant’s admission of negligence. This process had a sobering effect on Applicant 
and I am confident that he will endeavor to file timely his tax returns in the future. 
  
 
9 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
new AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I 
conclude that financial consideration security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
