 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-01819 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 14, 2016. On 
June 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.1 The Government was ready to proceed on October 2, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018. On April 13, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 16, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
                                                          
1 Because her initial SOR answer was deficient, Applicant submitted an updated answer on August 18, 
2017. 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence, without 
objection. I appended to the record correspondence the Government sent to Applicant 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s exhibit list as HE II. At the hearing, 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which I admitted 
into evidence, without objection. I left the record open until August 21, 2018. Applicant 
timely provided additional documents that were admitted into evidence as AE D through 
G, without objection. I appended the post-hearing submission email exchanges as HE 
III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant, age 50, has been married since 1993. She has four adult children, the 
eldest of which is her 33-year-old daughter. She earned a master’s degree in civil 
engineering in 1987. Applicant has been steadily employed as a database administrator 
since 2010. This is her first application for a security clearance.3 
 
Applicant cosigned two student-loan accounts to help her eldest child pay for 
medical school. Her daughter was solely responsible for repaying them, with her first 
payments to begin upon her graduation in 2015. Applicant learned that those accounts 
were in collection status during a September 2016 interview she had in connection with 
her security clearance background investigation. Applicant was previously aware that 
her daughter had intermittently missed payments, but never to the point of defaulting on 
the loans. Applicant told the investigator that she would make inquiries about the 
account to determine her liability.4  
 
Applicants and her daughter are estranged. After being unsuccessful at securing 
a position with a residency program, her daughter had a “mental breakdown” and cut 
ties with her family. Since then, her daughter has largely ignored Applicant’s phone calls 
and text messages, except for a few text exchanges about the student loans following 
the 2016 interview. In March 2017, her daughter provided information about the creditor 
and told Applicant to do whatever she wanted with the loans.5  
 
Given her inability to secure a commitment from her daughter to resolve the debt, 
Applicant initiated efforts to resolve it herself. In July 2017, she finalized an arrangement 
to repay the debt via an initial payment of $661 followed by monthly payments of $150. 
She is required to contact the creditor every six months to renew the arrangement. 
Applicant made consistent payments through August 2018, with the exception of two 
months (January and February 2018) when she neglected to timely contact the agency 
for the renewal. She missed the renewal date because the payments had been 
                                                          
2 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer and her SCA (GE 1). 
 
3 Tr. at 6-7, 32-35. 
 
4 GE 2 at 4-5; Tr. at 24-28. 
 
5 AE E and G; Tr. at 24-25, 31-32, 41-43, 47. 
 
 
3 
 
automatically deducted from her checking account so it was not on her radar and it just 
“slipped [her] mind.” As of April 2018, the balance of the two loans totaled $31,414.6 
 
Applicant attributed the delay in resolving the debt, once it was brought to her 
attention, to a combination of her daughter’s lack of responsiveness, her own 
procrastination, and the several months it took to negotiate the payment arrangement. 
There will be no further delays because Applicant is committed to staying “on top of it.” 
She has continued the automatic deduction for her $150 monthly payments, and plans 
to schedule future renewal dates on her calendar so that she does not miss it again.7 
She has a phone appointment with the lender on September 10, 2018, during which she 
will renew the arrangement and automatic deduction. She currently lives within her 
means and is managing her finances responsibly.8 Applicant’s current manager praised 
her work performance and advocated for Applicant to maintain her security clearance.9  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”11 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 AE A through E and G; Tr. at 24-31, 48.  
 
7 Tr. at 28, 40-50. 
 
8 Tr. at 25 and 35. 
 
9 AE F and G. 
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Egan at 527. 
 
12 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.14 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”15 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.16 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.17 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.18 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”19 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”20 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
13 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
14 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
17 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
20 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent student-loan accounts establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Her daughter’s default on the student-loan accounts was a circumstance beyond 
Applicant’s control. She acted responsibly to resolve the debt once it became clear that 
her daughter would not do so as originally planned. While there was a delay in Applicant 
initiating contact with the creditor, it is not security significant in light of the record as a 
whole. Applicant has established a meaningful track record of payments sufficient to 
demonstrate that she will follow through with the payment arrangement. While Applicant 
is not currently debt free, given the circumstances under which she incurred this debt 
and the responsible manner in which she has addressed it, I have no lingering doubts 
about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
