 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01260 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by her history of illegal drug use, purchase, and 
prescription drug abuse. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement and substance misuse guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a 
determination whether to deny her security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on May 21, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through M, without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 6, 2018.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
After the SOR was issued in the case, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 25, has worked for a federal contactor since April 2015. She 
completed a security clearance application, her first, in May 2015. Applicant disclosed 
the use and purchase of illegal drugs and misuse of prescription drugs between 2007 
and 2015. The SOR alleges that Applicant used: marijuana (March 2007 to August 
2016); hallucinogenic mushrooms (June 2010 to November 2012); ecstasy (June 2011 
to December 2014); LSD (June 2011 to November 2014); cocaine (October 2011 to 
October 2014); dimethyltryptamine (DMT) (March 2013); and Adderall (April 2011 to 
December 2012). The SOR also alleges that Applicant purchased illegal drugs multiple 
times between March 2007 and August 2016. Applicant admits the SOR allegations.2 
 
Applicant began using marijuana at age 14 while in high school. When she 
attended college between August 2010 and December 2013, her drug use expanded to 
include recreational use of hallucinogenic mushrooms, ecstasy, LSD, cocaine, and 
Adderall. In March 2013, Applicant used DMT, an experience she considered the 
“scariest and most overwhelming thing I’ve ever experienced in my life . . .” However, 
she continued to use illegal drugs after this incident. Applicant’s use occurred primarily 
in social settings. She continued to use marijuana, ecstasy, cocaine, and LSD in the 
months after she graduated and remained in her college community. She continued to 
use these drugs while working as an intern for her mother’s cosmetic company between 
June and September 2014 and during her first professional role at a financial services 
firm between September and December 2014.3  
 
Applicant moved to her current city in January 2015. She cited the move as a big 
change and an opportunity for a fresh start. However, she continued to use marijuana 
during her internship with the House of Representatives between January 2015 and 
March 2015 and while working as a congressional staffer between March 2015 and 
April 2015.  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 13-14, 16-20, 28-32; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 33-36; GE 1.  
 
3 
 
Applicant began working for her current employer in April 2015. She was aware 
that the company had a drug-free work environment. On her security clearance 
application, Applicant noted: 
 
I realize fully that my use/purchase of drug in college and a bit beyond 
does not make me an ideal candidate for a security clearance. It shows 
lack of judgment and a disregard for the rules. I look back on these 
decisions now, some not so long ago, and do truly realize how stupid I 
have been. . . . On January 3, 2015, I picked up my life, put it in a 
suitcase, and moved to [current city] . . .This was and still is a huge turning 
point in my life. While I cannot take back the things I’ve done, I can only 
put my best foot forward and commit fully to putting this part of my life 
behind me, something I’ve begun to and will continue to do so as a I get 
older.4 
 
 With respect to future marijuana use, Applicant further explained: 
 
I do not intend to smoke weed anymore because I cannot be productive 
whatsoever when high. I do not like the sensation of being high anymore, 
it makes me uneasy and all too aware that this is wrong. Weed has been 
something which I’ve realized does not add any value to my life and know 
I can do without, as I live in a city where weed is legal and everywhere. In 
college, I would have given in to social situations where weed was 
involved, however, I know myself and know I can say “no.” Frankly, I am a 
grown up with a good job and surrounded by successful [people]; pot is 
something I’ve begun to associate with being lazy and unproductive.5  
 
 In July 2016, Applicant received a promotion to her current position. One month 
later, she purchased and used marijuana edibles while on vacation in another U.S. city 
where it is legal to do so. She believed that because it was legal in the vacation city that 
she was not violating any laws or her employer’s drug-free policy. Although she did not 
report this instance of drug use to her employer, she did disclose it in her February 2017 
background interview. During the interview, Applicant reiterated her intent not to use 
illegal drugs in the future. After the SOR was issued in May 2017, Applicant voluntarily 
submitted to a drug test, which showed no evidence of recent drug use. In July 2017, 
Applicant executed a signed statement of intent to abstain from illegal drug use with 
revocation of access to classified information for any future use.6  
 
 Applicant claims her days of illegal drug use are behind her and that she no 
longer associates with drug users. She is ashamed of her history of illegal drug use. 
Applicant is growing in her career field and is well regarded by her employer and clients. 
In support of her application for access to classified information, Applicant provided 
                                                          
4 GE 1. 
 
5 GE 1.  
 
6 Tr. 21; GE 2; AE D-E. 
 
4 
 
eight favorable character references, including the two Congressmen for whom she 
worked between January and April 2015. Applicant claimed that each reference was 
aware of her history of illegal drug use, but such knowledge is not reflected in any of the 
letters.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 21-25, 39, 41-42; AE F-M. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness, because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.8 Applicant’s admissions 
establish a prima facie case that Applicant used illegal drugs, abused prescription 
drugs, and purchased illegal drugs between 2007 and 2016.9 
 
The record contains some evidence in mitigation, specifically, Applicant’s full and 
candid disclosure of her history of illegal drug involvement during the adjudication 
process, as well as her signed statement of intent to abstain from illegal drug use in the 
future. However, these facts do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s two years 
of sobriety are not enough to mitigate her ten-year history of recreational drug use. Also 
of concern is that Applicant continued to use illegal drugs after completing her security 
clearance application in which she acknowledged the negative security implications of 
her history of illegal drug use, and promised to refrain from such activity in the future.   
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”10 During the current 
adjudication, Applicant revealed conduct that supports a negative whole-person 
assessment of her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Her behavior also casts 
doubt on her ability to follow rules and regulations. Accordingly, her access to classified 
information is denied.  
                                                          
8  See, AG ¶ 24.  
 
9 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). 
 
10 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
