 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 18-00038 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara K. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 24, 2017. 
(Item 3.) On January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2018 (Answer), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 10, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 
8. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
 
2 
 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on April 18, 2018, but 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 46, is not married and has three adult children. She graduated from 
high school in 1989. She separated from her husband in 2011. There is no evidence in 
the record of an official divorce. She has a significant other with whom she lives. She was 
unemployed from November 2011 to May 2012 and again in 2016. (Item 8) She has been 
employed with her current employer since November 2016. She has not held a security 
clearance. 
 
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) sets forth security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). It lists eight collection accounts and a judgment, totaling about 
$13,200. The SOR also alleges Applicant failed to file her 2013 Federal income tax return. 
(Item 3) In her Answer, Applicant admits to all allegations. She stated that her wages are 
being garnished for the delinquent taxes from tax year 2013 in the amount of $1,740.  
(Item 2) 
 
Applicant told the investigator during her 2017 subject interview that her 2013 
delinquent taxes had been paid, but in her answers to interrogatories, she stated that she 
had no documentation from the IRS to prove her assertion. She blamed her financial 
issues on her 2011 marital separation  and the foreclosure of her home. (Items 3 and 8) 
 
Applicant stated in her interview that she could have avoided her financial 
delinquencies if she had been in a more responsible state of mind at the time, and did not 
let her life spiral out of control. (Item 8) The judgment alleged in the SOR was due to lack 
of homeowner’s association payments.  The record is silent as to Applicant’s current 
financial stability. She provided no other details about the actions that she may have taken 
at the time to address the financial issues. There is no record of financial counseling.  
 
Applicant did not supplement the record by responding to the FORM. She provided 
no documentary evidence of any payments or payment plans. Although she stated that 
the delinquent taxes were garnished and or paid, she provided no proof. There is no 
information in the record about the $10,000 judgment (SOR 1.k) or how she plans to 
resolve or address such.  
 
  Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
3 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
4 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”),  AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) and AG (19 (f) (“failure to file  or 
fraudulently file filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual Federal , state or local income tax as required.)” 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s 2011 marital separation and 
unemployment may have been a condition beyond her control, she has not acted 
responsibly to address the resulting debts and tax issues. Nor has she provided a nexus  
between those conditions and the delinquent accounts and her failure to file and pay  
federal taxes as required by law. 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant presented no documentary 
evidence of progress in resolving her debts or information to support that she has timely 
filed her federal tax returns or paid the delinquent taxes. There is no indication that she 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. The record is silent as to financial 
counseling. She has not provided sufficient documentation of any track record, or even a 
plan, to address and resolve her delinquent debts and judgment. The record is silent as 
to her current ability to repay her delinquent debts, the reasons that they have persisted, 
or her plan to resolve them. Her financial problems are not under control.  
 
Applicant failed to meet her burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k. against Applicant. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F and evaluating the scant  evidence she provided 
in the context of the whole person,  I conclude that Applicant  has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-k:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
6 
 
     Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
