 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 18-00420 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On April 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 26, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on July 2, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a response to 
the FORM dated July 23, 2018. He attached three certificates of completion, a list of 
training courses completed, and four character reference letters. The Government’s 
evidence, identified as Items 1 through 15, is admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He graduated from high school in 1985, and took some 
college courses. Applicant has been employed as an information technology (IT) 
professional by a federal contractor since March 2015. He reported previous 
assignments with federal contractors going back to 1999, and a previous security 
clearance for the past 13 years with no issues.2 Applicant reports no military service and 
he has been married since October 2004. He reports two children, ages four, and eight.  
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of his security clearance 
application (SCA),3 including an $85,000 federal tax lien filed in November 2010 due to 
Applicant not having enough taxes withheld from pay checks over multiple years. He 
stated that he was improperly advised by a tax professional about the proper amount to 
withhold, and he has now entered into a repayment plan with the Internal Revenue  
Service (IRS).4 Applicant reported a similar $9,000 state tax lien entered in April 2010, 
due to inadequate withholding of state taxes by his employer. His credit bureau reports 
reflect an additional state tax lien in the amount of $4,229 filed on September 1, 2012.5 
He subsequently changed his withholdings form with his payroll office, and filed a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. Applicant stated that he and his wife initially filed for 
bankruptcy protection in September 2014. However, they allowed that Chapter 13 plan 
to be dismissed and re-filed for a more feasible plan in September 2015. He also 
claimed to be repaying both federal and state tax fees as part of their repayment 
schedule in the Chapter 13 plan.  
 
The SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling $100,175 plus two failed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy plans, one filed in 2014 (dismissed in 2015) and another one 
filed in September 2015 (dismissed in May 2017). The bankruptcy court documents 
provided by Department Counsel reflect the initial Chapter 13 plan was dismissed in 
July 2015 due to failure to amend.6 Applicant had obtained modifications to this Chapter 
13 plan in February 2015, and again in May 2015 before defaulting. The second 
Chapter 13 petition was filed in September 2015, and dismissed on May 12, 2017, for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
material default in payment plan.7 Applicant’s explanation for this second default was 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 23, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3).  
 
2 Response to FORM.  
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Item 3, p. 45.  
 
5 Item 13. 
 
6 Items 4 and 5. 
 
7 Item 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
that he and his wife surrendered their home and two vehicles around that time, and he 
could not afford the monthly payments to the trustee.8  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to owing the $85,000 federal tax 
lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e and the two state tax liens at SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, as well as 
the two dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy plans. The bankruptcy court documents 
indicate that these tax liens were filed in November 2010 and November 2011.9 He 
claims that he allowed the two bankruptcy cases to be dismissed “on advice of our 
attorney” in his answer to the SOR. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 
1.d, and provided documentation substantiating his assertions that these have now 
been paid in full. He also provided evidence of a payment plan entered into with the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he had surgery in 2013, and he was 
out of work for two months. This caused his debts to become delinquent in the fall of 
2013. Applicant lost approximately $12,862 in wages for the two months. Also, he 
changed tax accountants in 2013, and his accountant provided erroneous or incomplete 
tax advice. No details or corroborating information were provided about this accountant, 
or the attorney supposedly relied upon in the two bankruptcy defaults. Although, 
Applicant and his wife have combined net monthly incomes of $10,824, they only paid 
approximately $25,000 into the Chapter 13 plans over a two and one half year period, at 
the rate of $1,700 each month to the bankruptcy trustee.  
 
In his responses to interrogatories, Applicant attached a student loan 
rehabilitation agreement, which indicated he had been in default on student loans.10 He 
provided no budget showing income against expenses, or other documentation to show 
progress on his delinquent tax debts. He professed his intentions to repay these 
delinquencies in his response to interrogatories in December 2017, but provided no 
substantiation showing results.  
 
Applicant received financial counseling from a credit repair agency from July 
2014 to June 2015. It is unclear what progress the agency has made on the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Attached to his response to the FORM, Applicant provided four 
favorable character reference letters, all attesting to his work ethic, integrity, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. Applicant also attached a list of completed training 
courses, and three certificates of completion of cyber-awareness and sensitive 
information assurance courses.   
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Item 12, p. 7. 
 
9 Item 7, schedule D. 
 
10 Item 14. Student loan delinquencies were not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the new Administrative Guidelines (AGs) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Decisions 
include consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 (f) failure to pay or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, local 
               income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or 
               local income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, bankruptcy court documents, and answer to the SOR. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to 
 
6 
 
 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 Applicant has not met that burden. 
Most of the delinquent debts have not been addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Although Applicant has made some progress in resolving his delinquent debts, 
he has not provided any explanation how he became delinquent on these debts in the 
first place, aside from two months of lost wages following his surgery in 2013. The most 
glaring deficiency is his federal and state tax liens amounting to almost $100,000. 
Applicant has known about these tax problems for over six years since the liens were 
entered in 2010 and 2011, before his surgery. He has done nothing to address these 
tax delinquencies aside from two half-hearted chapter 13 plans that went into default. 
He did not follow through with his obligations to the bankruptcy trustee. He has not 
identified any circumstances or conditions that were beyond his control. He has 
produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with his answer to the SOR, 
or in response to the FORM. Applicant has derived income from federal contractors for 
most of the last 20 years. Yet, he has not paid his taxes. He has not demonstrated that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide 
sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his 
debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and 
bankruptcy court documents reflect delinquent tax debts totaling over $98,000. 
Applicant did not provide enough details with documentary corroboration about what he 
did to address his SOR debts. He did not provide documentation relating to any of the 
SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact;12 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for 
the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting 
to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof 
to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in 
the SOR. (FORM at 4) Aside from Applicant’s resolution of a few smaller consumer 
debts, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved the SOR debts except SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 4) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
12 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has retained a credit repair 
agency to help him and he paid off some of the smaller debts. Most importantly, 
Applicant has not addressed the delinquent tax allegations in the SOR. He has not met 
his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:              For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e through 1.i:                 Against Applicant  
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
