 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 18-00020 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
_________ 
 
DECISION 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct).1 Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 20, 2015. 
(Item 5.) On January 19, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 21, 2018 (Answer), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 16, 2018. On April 21, 2018, a complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as 
                                                          
1 The Government withdrew the allegation under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
2 
 
Items 1 through 10. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM, but did 
not send submissions to supplement the record. The case was assigned to me on August 
8, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, age 35, is single. He graduated from high school in 2001, and attended 
college courses, but he did not obtain an undergraduate degree. He obtained an 
associate’s degree in 2012, and he continues attending college courses. Applicant served 
in the United States Marine Corps (USMC) inactive reserve from 2001 to 2005, receiving 
an honorable discharge. In 2010, he enlisted in the Army National Guard. Applicant was 
granted a security clearance in 2012 with a warning that failure to resolve his delinquent 
debts may result in the suspension of his security clearance. (Item 9). He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2015. (Item 5)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted on a charged-off student loan account 
for approximately $23,770; a collection account in the amount of $8,540 from unpaid rent; 
a charged-off account in the amount of $1,070; and a collection account in the amount of 
$396. He admits the delinquent debts in SOR 1.a and 1.b, but he denies the debts alleged 
in SOR 1.c and 1.d and provides explanations. (Item 4) The four debts allege in total 
approximately $33,000. (Items 6,7)  
 
Applicant attributed the delinquent debt to a loss of employment. In his 2010 
investigative interview, he explained that he was out of work from October 2009 to 
February 2010, and he had no means of income. He lived with friends and received 
financial support from his mother. (Item 10)  However, he was unemployed after being 
fired because he lost his security clearance after he lied about marijuana use during a 
polygraph. (Item 5) He was also unemployed from January 2009 to June 2009. At that 
time, he received unemployment compensation. This is the initial reason that he became 
late with his bills. He stated that he would contact his creditors and make arrangements 
to have them paid. (Item 10). 
 
In Applicant’s 2017 investigative interview, he acknowledged that he was behind 
in rent. His girlfriend lost her job, and moved out of the apartment and there was 
insufficient income to pay for the rent. (Item 10) He also explained that he was deployed 
to Afghanistan in 2013-2014. He elaborated on his education by stating that some of the 
college classes were online and part time. He attended the technical institute in person 
and full time. (Item 10) 
 
As to SOR 1.a, Applicant admitted the local student loan debt of $23,779. He 
assumed that this student loan was consolidated with his federal student loans. He knows 
now that it is not. He is making payments and submitted an authorization of payments to 
the account in the amount of $75 a month beginning in February 2018. However, there is 
no evidence of any payments made. 
 
 
3 
 
As to SOR 1.b, Applicant admits the debt of $8,540 from a 2016 rental issue. He 
submitted a document from the creditor that he has made two payments of $373 that 
started in February 2018. (Attachment to Answer) 
 
Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR 1.c and 1.d, for a total of $1,470. He 
stated that in 2017, he received a 1099-C forgiving him of this debt. (Item 4) He has not 
submitted evidence of a 1099-C.  He stated that he paid the debt in SOR 1.d it on March 
15, 2017. He did not provide any evidence of payment. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
 
4 
 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
      Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and credit reports reflect delinquent debts. This establishes 
two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts since 
approximately 2009. He was unemployed after being fired for a time but did not take 
immediate action to resolve the issue in the years since then, until recently to resolve the 
issue. There are doubts about his ability or willingness to pay his debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s girlfriend moved out of their 
apartment and he could not pay the rent.  He has now started almost two years later to 
make two payments. As to the student loans, he may not have realized the private loan 
was not consolidated, but he should have been more responsible in resolving it. Applicant 
stated that he paid the other two delinquent accounts, but provided no proof. However, 
he has not produced any information that he has acted responsibly under the situation. 
He has started to contact creditors to arrange payment plans, but this is not sufficient 
mitigation.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not respond to the FORM 
to demonstrate the continuing good-faith efforts that have been made to pay his accounts 
until recently. He did not provide documentation that he has paid SOR 1.c and 1.d.  The 
record is silent as to any financial counseling.  
 
Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including Applicant’s years of military service and his girlfriend’s 
unemployment. I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concern. 
Especially, since he was given a warning in 2012 concerning his finances and future 
consequences. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d: Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E  WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
