 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00081 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Abuse). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 13, 2016. On 
March 2, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 20, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 6, 2018, 
and the case was assigned to me on April 12, 2018. On May 18, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 11, 2108. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any 
documentary evidence. I kept the record open until June 25, 2018, to enable him to 
submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2017. (Tr. 21.) He worked for another federal 
contractor from July 2016 until he began his current job. He previously applied for a 
security clearance and his application was denied in May 2016. 
 
 Applicant has never married. He has lived with a cohabitant since February 2016. 
He has a three-year-old son. He attended a community college from August 2007 to 
May 2009 and a university from August 2008 to February 2011, but he has not received 
a degree. He testified that he dropped out of college because of low grades caused by 
his lack of interest. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana in March 2011. He was 
given first-offender status and required to perform community service, attend Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings, and participate in drug-education classes. He completed 
the first-offender program and the charges were dismissed. (GX 2 at 9; GX 3.) He has 
never received counseling or treatment, except for the court-ordered programs in the 
first-offender program. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
 Applicant purchased and used marijuana once or twice a week from March 2008 
to February 2011. He testified that he stopped using marijuana to improve his job 
opportunities. He used it in late 2016 during a beach trip with friends, and then failed a 
urinalysis administered by his employer a day or two later. (Tr. 23-26, 31; GX 2 at 9-10.)  
 
Applicant could not remember the names of the friends with whom he smoked 
marijuana in 2016. He testified he “wasn’t really thinking” when he used it in 2016, and 
that he “just figured it was a harmless use.” (Tr. 28.) He also testified at the hearing that 
he has not used marijuana since 2016. (Tr. 31.) He was tested for drug use when he 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
was hired by his current employer, and the test was negative. (Tr. 33-34; AX A.) When 
asked what lifestyle changes he had made since his last use of marijuana, he testified 
that “nothing of significance” had changed. (Tr. 35.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 
4 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(b): testing positive for an illegal drug; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Applicant’s marijuana involvement 
was recent, frequent, and did not occur under unusual circumstances making 
recurrence unlikely. His last use was less than two years ago and occurred while he 
was employed by a federal contractor and after the birth of his son. He accepted an 
invitation to use marijuana from “friends,” but he could not remember their names. He 
has acknowledged his marijuana involvement, but he has not changed his lifestyle or 
environment. To the contrary, he testified that “nothing of significance” has changed in 
his life. He has not provided the statement of intent provided for in AG ¶ 26(b)(3). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid and 
sincere at the hearing, but he also seemed passive and unfocused. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
