                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 18-00357
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On February 13, 2018, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations)  and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in June 2017. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2018.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant material (FORM), dated April 16,
2018.   Applicant received the FORM on April 26, 2018. Applicant timely responded to1
the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under 
Guideline F (1.a through 1.e), but provided no explanations. Applicant admitted the
falsification allegation under Guideline E. (Item 2)
Applicant is 59 years old. He is married and has two children. He graduated from
high school in 1978. Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in
2017 and has been employed as a federal contractor since 1984. He has never held a
security clearance. (Item 2). 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, including a collection account in the
amount of $5,645 (creditor 1.a), and a charged-off account in the amount of $5,455
(creditor 1.b). (GX 4-6) Applicant also has a collection account in the amount of
$14,617; a medical account in collection for $109; and a medical account in collection
for $105. The approximate total for the delinquent debts is about $26,000. Applicant did
not disclose any financial issues on his SCA. When he was interviewed in 2017, he told
the investigator that he was not aware of the accounts, when they were opened or
when they were last paid. He cited to the fact that his wife used credit cards but he was
not aware of the charges. He continued to state that he could not afford to pay those
bills, but he would look into the accounts and try to settle them. Applicant did reveal that
SOR 1.c is possibly due to a quick sale of a home, but he had no other information.
Applicant stated that he had no other financial information to discuss. He lives
pay check to pay check, but pays his current bills. He has not had financial counseling
or tried debt consolidation. In the future, he stated that he will pay off debt and bills on
time. (Item 3) He stated that he had no documentation to provide. There is no
information in the record about his income.
Applicant’s credit reports in the record reflect many accounts that are “pays as
agreed”, but each report contains the delinquent accounts that are alleged in the SOR
1.a through 1.e. The latest credit report is from 2018. (GX 4-6)
As alleged under SOR 2.a, Personal Conduct, Applicant admitted, with no
explanation, that he deliberately falsified his 2017 SCA when he responded, “No” to the
questions in Section 26- Financial - Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts, or in the
past seven (7) years defaulted on any type of loan; or had bills turned over to a
collection agency; or any account suspended; or any delinquent debt over 120 days
due. (Item 1) Based on his admission, corroborated by the record evidence, a
falsification is warranted.
    Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
2
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of2
evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
3
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified or sensitive information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The following condition is relevant here.
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
In this case, AG ¶ 16 (a) applies. Applicant answered “No” to all questions in
Section 26 - Financial, on his 2017 SCA. Applicant admitted to this allegation and
provided no explanation. During his 2017 interview, he stated that he was not aware of
any delinquent accounts, but when confronted by the investigator in his 2017 interview,
he suggested that the accounts were credit accounts that he could not afford to pay. He
also referred to a past-due mortgage account that involved a short sale. He knew that
there were financial issues when he completed the SCA. He deliberately omitted the
financial information.  This disqualifying condition is established.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. It also states that an individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts
to generate funds.
4
The Government produced credible evidence that Applicant had five delinquent
accounts on his credit report. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
Applicant  provided no documentation to show that he has resolved any of his
delinquent debts. He, in fact, during his interview at first stated that he was not aware of
any of the accounts and then proceeded to say that they might be his credit cards used
by his wife. They have been on his credit reports for many years. He has a history of
financial problems. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not  applicable.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant provided no explanations with his admissions to the SOR or
during his interview. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has no application. He  provided no
documentation that he has resolved his debts or has the means to do so. There is no 
information that he has received financial counseling. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control), does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
5
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 59 years old. He has worked for his current employer for many years. This
is his first application for a security clearance. There is nothing in the record concerning
any efforts to address the financial issues. He stated that he would look into the
accounts and try to settle, but he also stated that he lives paycheck to paycheck. He
has not mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.
I  find that Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance application.
Applicant admitted to this allegation without any explanation. He deliberately omitted
information about his finances in his responses to Section 26. 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern or the
personal conduct concern.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
6
7
