 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 11-10366 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances largely beyond his control, Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties. However, Applicant has resolved all his delinquent accounts and 
mitigated the potential financial security concern. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 13, 2015. 
On January 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 4, 2016, and the case was 
assigned to me on January 24, 2017. On May 5, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for May 25, 2017. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. He testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) 
A through N, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until June 8, 
2017, to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX 
O through AX R, which I have admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 5, 2017. 
 
While this decision was pending, the DOD implemented the amended AG on June 
8, 2017. This decision will be decided based on the amended AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old field services representative employed by a federal 
contractor since June 2011. He has held a security clearance since 2001. He served 
honorably in the U.S. Army from February 2001 until April 2009, including a combat 
deployment. He and his former wife married in 2008, divorced in 2015, and have shared 
custody of their nine-year-old son. (GX 1; Tr. 35-36.)  
 
The SOR alleges eight debts totaling approximately $27,628. These debts include 
a delinquent mortgage account of $14,615, several credit-card accounts, and two medical 
accounts. In his Answer, Applicant admits that each of the debts is his, and provides the 
status of each debt. The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s April 2016, April 
2015 and December 2010 credit bureau reports (CBR). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant and his former wife had a tumultuous relationship. In July 2014, Applicant 
and his wife got into an altercation during which Applicant’s wife struck Applicant. He 
restrained her, called the police, and left the premises to wait for their arrival. In the 
interim, Applicant’s wife called the police and stated that Applicant choked her. Applicant 
was arrested and charged with felony domestic violence. As a result of this charge, 
Applicant was court ordered to complete an anger management course, and the charges 
were not prosecuted. Applicant and his wife did not reconcile. 
 
After Applicant was arrested, he hired an attorney to represent him on the criminal 
charge. He also moved out of the marital home, and became financially responsible for 
two households. He also incurred the expenses of a divorce attorney. The increased 
 
3 
 
 
monthly expenses caused Applicant to fall behind on his ongoing monthly financial 
obligations, including his mortgage-loan payments. He inquired about selling his house, 
but the realtor required a $10,000 fee. Because Applicant was upside down on the 
mortgage and there would be no proceeds from a sale, Applicant would be required to 
pay the fee out-of-pocket, and could not afford to do so. He then attempted to dispense 
of the house through the process of deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, but his wife refused to 
vacate the house, and he was unable to avail himself of this process. Ultimately, the 
house was foreclosed in about March 2015. (Tr. 53- 57; AX M.) The foreclosure initially 
resulted in a deficiency balance of $14,615, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
Applicant intended to satisfy the deficiency balance when he received payment 
from his insurance for a totaled vehicle. He called the mortgage lender at least five times 
during the foreclosure process in an effort to gain information on how to pay the debt. 
Eventually, Applicant was informed that he has no liability for the deficiency balance 
because the loan was guaranteed through the Department of Veterans Affairs. This debt 
is resolved. (GX 6; Tr. 53-54; AX A.) 
 
Applicant’s other SOR accounts total approximately $13,000. Applicant and his 
wife finalized their divorce in April 2015, and Applicant began resolving his debts shortly 
thereafter. In December 2015, Applicant paid SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and settled SOR 
¶ 1.g. He has also paid SOR ¶ 1.h. (GX 6; AX C; AX O; AX P). 
 
Applicant’s current job requires him to deploy to the Middle East every other year 
for a period of one year. Applicant’s immediate supervisor, who trained and mentored 
Applicant when he entered the military in 2001, considers Applicant to be his top 
performer, and considers him to be trustworthy and worthy of holding a security 
clearance. Applicant’s supervisor further stated that Applicant’s reputation while deployed 
is beyond reproach. Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) testified that Applicant self-
reported his delinquent accounts. The FSO further stated that Applicant is honest, 
trustworthy, has integrity, and has outstanding character. (Tr. 20-29.)  
 
Applicant completed a financial counseling course in May 2017. Applicant has not 
incurred any recent delinquent debt and lives within his means. He has approximately 
$35,000 in his 401(k) account. He provides financial support as needed to his mother and 
is current on his child support obligations. Applicant’s testimony was straightforward, 
sincere, and credible. (GX 6; Tr. 64; AX H; AX I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
4 
 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
5 
 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 The record establishes that Applicant has “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” (AG ¶ 19(c). The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 However, the conditions that resulted in Applicant’s financial delinquencies were 
largely beyond his control and are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s difficult relationship with 
his wife resulted in his arrest, their divorce, and associated costs, that caused Applicant 
to fall behind on his mortgage-loan payments and other financial obligations. However, 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and in good faith by attempting 
other avenues of resolution before the foreclosure. He intended to pay the deficiency 
balance, and repeatedly contacted the mortgage lender in an effort to do so. He paid the 
majority of his debts in December 2015 before the SOR was issued, and has since 
resolved all his delinquent accounts. He participated in financial counseling. He has not 
incurred any recent delinquent debt, is current on all his ongoing financial obligations, and 
contributes to his 401(k). Applicant’s past financial difficulties do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances.  I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has served on active duty in the Army for over seven years, and 
continues to support the military as a civilian. He has held a security clearance since 
2001, and is a highly regarded employee. He was straightforward, sincere, and credible 
in his testimony.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the potential security concerns raised by his past financial issues. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through will 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
