KEYWORD: Guideline: F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the
Judge. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05768.a1
DATE: 06/22/2017
DATE: June 22, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No.14-05768
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On December 15, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On April 27, 2017, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Gregg A. Cervi denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains new evidence in the form of a narrative statement about events that have had an
impact on his finances and the progress he has made in resolving his debts.  It also contains
documents that were  not previously submitted to the Judge, many of which post-date the Judge’s
decision.  The Appeal Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive
¶ E3.1.29. 
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
