 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06773  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s wife suffered serious health problems starting in 2010, and was later 
found to be fully and permanently disabled. He depleted savings and economized, but 
eventually followed professional advice and filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. 
Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On December 31, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2016. He denied all of the SOR 
allegations concerning his bankruptcy filings and delinquent debts, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On May 25, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on May 26, 2016, and received by him on June 7, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on June 20, 2016. He did not object to Items 1 
through 3 or Items 7 through 10, although he provided a minor correction to one 
statement reported in Item 3. Applicant “took exception” to Items 4 through 6 on the 
basis that they were not relevant to the allegations in the SOR or his answer thereto. 
Items 4 and 6 pertain to Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 1996, which was 
not alleged as an issue supporting security concerns in the SOR. That evidence will not 
be considered with respect to establishment of any disqualifying conditions, but is 
admitted for the limited purpose of evaluating the applicability of mitigating conditions 
and the whole-person analysis. Item 5 contains only cumulative information concerning 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, filed in January 2013, and some completely 
irrelevant information concerning a minor parking citation that was dismissed in May 
2013. Item 5 is not admitted and will not be considered. Applicant also submitted 
additional information in his FORM response, to which Department Counsel had no 
objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 6, 2017. Items 1 through 4 and 6 
through 10 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s response to the FORM is marked as 
exhibit (AE) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He is married, with two adult children. He earned 
master’s degrees in aerospace engineering and business administration, and has 
worked for a defense contractor since February 2009. He has no prior Federal 
employment or military service, but has held security clearances without incident for 
 
 
3 
 
 
more than 35 years while holding various positions in the defense industry. (Item 2; Item 
3; AE A.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife encountered simultaneous employment difficulties in the 
mid-1990s that were beyond their control, which led them to file for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy relief. Thereafter, their financial situation stabilized and substantially 
improved. They were both gainfully employed and comfortably solvent, with a combined 
six-figure family income through the late-2000s. These circumstances had no adverse 
effect on Applicant’s security clearance eligibility or his performance of security-related 
obligations. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 6; AE A.)  
 
 In 2010, Applicant’s wife began suffering a number of severe physical and mental 
health problems, making it difficult for her to continue running her professional 
consulting business. She underwent a number of medical evaluations and treatments 
over the next three years, incurring tens of thousands of dollars in medical bills that 
were not covered by the family’s substantial health insurance. Her illnesses and medical 
appointments also caused Applicant to cut back on his work hours to assist her. As a 
result, the couple’s 2012 combined income was reduced by more than $100,000 from 
their 2009 combined income. In April 2015, an administrative law judge from the Social 
Security Administration found that Applicant’s wife had been fully and permanently 
disabled from December 2010 due to numerous physical and mental health 
impairments. (Item 1; AE A.) 
 
 From 2010 through 2012, Applicant’s family was able to remain current on their 
debt obligations, while absorbing the loss of income and increased medical expenses, 
because they had lived frugally and maintained significant savings in previous years. 
They drew down these savings while hoping that medical solutions could be found to 
resolve Applicant’s wife’s debilitating problems. By late 2012, Applicant realized that 
such solutions remained elusive, and that the family’s resources were being depleted. 
He sought financial and legal counseling, and was advised that filing for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy relief offered the best option for resolution of the financial hardships 
imposed by these issues. He chose to accept this advice and filed for bankruptcy before 
any of his debts became delinquent. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 3; Item 9; Item 10; AE A.) 
 
  Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney initially filed Chapter 13 proceedings in 
December 2012 but, due to a calendaring error, missed a deadline for filing some 
supporting documentation in early January 2013. This error caused the bankruptcy 
court to dismiss the initial case. On January 19, 2013, the attorney refiled Applicant’s 
Chapter 13 petition with all supporting documentation. Although the bankruptcy court 
issued several subsequent orders dismissing the Chapter 13 proceeding due to the 
complex nature of the case, Applicant’s attorney was able to have it reinstated in each 
instance after demonstrating justification for the issues involved. Applicant’s Chapter 13 
plan, which calls for payment of more than $65,000 to his creditors, was finally 
approved on November 12, 2014. Applicant made every payment pursuant to that plan 
on time or early. All of Applicant’s debts, including those cited in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 
 
 
4 
 
 
1.g, are included in the plan and being paid, as required, under court supervision. 
Applicant and his bankruptcy attorney provided extensive documentation of these facts. 
(Item 1. See also Exhibits J and L to attorney’s declaration.) 
 
 Applicant’s income is sufficient to maintain the ongoing bankruptcy payments and 
pay his current living expenses. Upon completion of his five-year bankruptcy plan in 
January 2018, his only remaining debts will be the first mortgage loan on his home and 
some student loan debts he co-signed for his children’s college education. This will 
result in more disposable income for the family than they currently experience while 
making the bankruptcy payments. (Item 1; AE A.)       
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
5 
 
 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:1  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant used a combination of savings and economization to meet the financial 
hardships resulting from his wife’s serious medical issues that started in 2010, but was 
unable to continue doing so after 2012. Due to this inability to satisfy some debts, he 
sought Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in early 2013. These facts establish prima 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel argued, on page 2 of the FORM, that the record established three disqualifying 
conditions under each of Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). This was an 
evident scrivener’s error, since neither the SOR nor the record evidence raise any issues under either of 
those guidelines. This statement has no evidentiary value, and is disregarded as a harmless error. 
 
 
6 
 
 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s wife was gainfully employed and contributing to their family income 
and activities before her unexpected and complex combination of physical and mental 
health issues arose in 2010. After drawing down savings and economizing for several 
years while hoping to find a cure for her ailments, Applicant consulted with financial and 
legal experts to determine the best course of action. In December 2012, he accepted 
and followed their advice to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceeding and pay fair 
proportions of his available income to various creditors under the supervision of a court-
appointed trustee. Applicant has followed all of the conditions of his original and 
modified bankruptcy plan, and has both the means and intention to continue making 
timely payments through plan completion in January 2018. At that point, all of his debts, 
except the first mortgage loan on his home and some student loans he co-signed for his 
children will be fully resolved. He has the means to remain solvent and continue 
repaying those debts. 
 
Applicant acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that were 
completely beyond his control, and there are clear indications that his financial issues 
are under control. He followed the recommendations of professional counselors, and is 
adhering to a good-faith, court-approved bankruptcy plan to repay and resolve his 
debts. The record establishes clear mitigation of financial security concerns under the 
provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues created by his 
wife’s debilitating health problems. He followed professional advice, and has 
consistently followed his five-year Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan to resolve his debts for 
four and a half years. The likelihood that financial problems will recur is minimal; and the 
potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is eliminated by court-supervised resolution 
of Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
