 
1 
 
 
                                                              
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05994 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence, related to her work in Iraq and a friend from Jordan. She did not mitigate the 
security concerns raised under the guideline for personal conduct, related to allegations 
of falsification, previous criminal incidents, and employment problems. National security 
eligibility is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. This decision 
applies the new Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) that came into effect on June 8, 2017. 1   
                                            
1I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, in addition to the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My Decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, which were in effect on the day of the hearing.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On July 14, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On November 2, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned Applicant’s case to me. On December 20, 2016, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the hearing for January 11, 2017. The hearing convened as scheduled. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. Applicant 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through U. All exhibits were admitted without objections. The 
record closed at the conclusion of the hearing. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq and Jordan. The request and the attached documents 
pertinent to Iraq and Jordan are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. 
Applicant did not object to my consideration of those administrative notice documents. 
(Tr. 11-12). Applicant also submitted administrative notice documents pertinent to Iraq 
and Jordan, which are included in the record as AE S and AE T. Department Counsel 
did not object to my consideration of those documents. (Tr. 14.) The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and pertinent to 
Iraq and Jordan, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all five allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR, and all seven 
allegations in Paragraph 2 of the SOR.  
 
Applicant is 70 years old. She was born in Iraq. She earned a bachelor’s degree 
from an Iraqi university in 1981. She came to the United States in 1970 and became a 
U.S. citizen in 1976. She obtained a master’s degree in 1983 from an American 
university. She is divorced since 2003 and has two adult children. She is a linguist and 
is fluent in Arabic, Assyrian, and Kurdish. She obtained a real estate broker’s license in 
2002. She completed a certification course in human terrain training and Iraqi 
immersion in 2010.  
 
Prior to and subsequent to working for federal contractors, Applicant has worked 
as a legal assistant for law firms, and has done translation work for private companies. 
She began a position with a federal contractor in February 2005. (Tr. 14-18; GE 1.) She 
completed three security clearance applications: February 2005; January 2011; and 
May 2015. (GE 3, GE 2, GE 1.) 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Applicant does not own property in Iraq or Jordan. She does not have financial 
assets in either country. She owns a house in the United States. (Tr. 48-49.) Her 
children and mother are citizens and residents of the United States. Her father is 
deceased. She considers herself a passionate American. (Tr. 51-52.) In May 2015, she 
reported that her assets in the United States totaled about $535,000. (GE 4.) She is 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
active in community organizations. (AE P.) She has not returned to Iraq since leaving in 
September 2009. She worked for a defense contractor since then. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Foreign Influence Allegations: 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant admitted that she developed a friendly relationship with an 
Iraqi officer, who worked closely with the U.S. Forces, while she served as a linguist and 
translator in Iraq. She said the last time she had contact with that officer was in June 
2011. (Tr. 22; GE 5; Answer.)  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant denied that she hosted or attended parties with Iraqi 
soldiers while serving as a linguist. She said that soldiers never lived in her quarters. 
She acknowledged that on occasion she served as a translator at events, attended by 
Iraqi and U.S. officials, including the officer noted above. Her sister, who served as a 
linguist in Iraq at the same time, and another linguist stated they never witnessed 
Applicant engaging in those activities. (Tr. 22; GE 5; AE C, AE D.) The Army reported 
that she improperly engaged in hosting and attending parties. (GE 7.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant testified that she no longer maintains contact with an 
individual, who was born in Iraq and resides in Jordan, as alleged. Her last contact with 
him was in 2010. She said she worked with him. (Tr. 23; Answer.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant admitted that she associated and worked with three Iraqi 
resident citizens of Iraq while there. She spoke to one of them a year ago and the other 
in about 2010. Another individual with whom she associated while in Iraq became a 
U.S. citizen. (Tr. 24-25; GE 5; Answer.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e) Applicant admitted that she worked on a television program while 
working as a linguist in Iraq; however, she denied that she worked with Iraqi nationals or 
that the program was sponsored by the Iraqi government. She testified that she did 
translation work for an American, who was producing an Iraqi television show. She said 
she had authorization to help with the project. (Tr. 25-27; Answer.) The U.S. advisor on 
the project confirmed that Applicant had authorization to work on the program. (AE I.) 
However, in an affidavit, dated June 2013, Applicant stated that she worked on a 
television project between January and August 2009, during which time she “met with 
Iraqi national crew members, who were colleagues and friends” of the American 
producer. (GE 6.)  
 
Personal Conduct Allegations 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) In September 1990, while employed as a translator and legal 
assistant for an immigration law firm, Applicant was arrested and charged with bribery of 
a public official, a felony. She was caught passing money to an immigration agent on 
behalf of clients who were about to be deported. She pleaded guilty and was sentenced 
to 18 months of incarceration and three years of supervised probation. She served in a 
detention center from December 1991 to May 1992, and then went into a halfway house 
for two months. She was released from probation in March 1995. (GE 4, GE 10.) She 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
realized she made a serious mistake in committing this crime and learned an important 
lesson. (Tr. 33-34, 62.)  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b) In 1997, Applicant pleaded guilty to theft by deception, a 
misdemeanor. She was sentenced to a year of probation, and ordered to pay $7,000 in 
restitution.  
 
Applicant explained that her daughter’s friend, who worked at a retail store, stole 
her credit card, used it to charge a large amount of items, and then voided the charges 
and collected a refund from the retailer. Applicant said she assumed the blame for the 
young woman and legal responsibility for the debt because she felt sorry for her and did 
not want her to go to jail. The young girl was arrested, but was not convicted as a result 
of Applicant’s actions. Applicant testified that she was unaware of the theft of her credit 
card at the time the girl used it. (Tr. 37, 44-47; Answer.) The young girl submitted a 
November 2016 affidavit stating that Applicant was not aware of the theft of her charge 
card. (AE J.) According to an investigative report from May 2015, the girl told the police 
that Applicant knew about the transactions. (GE 4.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.c) From April 2005 until September 2009, Applicant was deployed to 
Iraq with the U.S Army, where she worked as a contract linguist. In early September 
2009, subsequent to an U.S. Army intelligence investigation, Applicant was terminated 
and released from her employment. The Army based its decision on the following 
violations: unofficial communications with members of the Iraqi military, including 
generals; and receiving unauthorized gifts from members of the Iraqi military, including 
a vehicle. (GE 7.) An Incident History report prepared on September 9, 2009, by 
Applicant’s personnel office, cited the above allegations and other infractions. (GE 8.)   
 
Applicant acknowledged that she was terminated from her position in September 
2009, but denied the truth of the underlying reasons. She said the allegations were 
based on false accusations from other linguists and personality problems she had with 
them. (Tr. 39; Answer.) She referred to an August 3, 2009 email from her site manager, 
who told her not to return to work until he told her to do so. He stated she was not in 
trouble. (AE K.) A letter she later received from her personnel manager stated that she 
was terminated effective September 17, 2009, at will. It accused her of being a security 
risk. (Tr. 40.)   
 
After she returned home from Iraq, Applicant requested a copy of the incident 
and adverse information reports that were filed in September 2009. She received them 
in March 2010. (Tr. 65-66.) The Army’s adverse information report referenced incidents 
involving Applicant’s travel to another country with a large amount of money; negative 
information about her husband; improper use of her cell phone; and numerous and 
inappropriate interactions with local businessmen and soldiers. (GE 7.) An Incident 
History report, dated January 22, 2010, referenced her inappropriate hosting of parties 
for local soldiers, receipt of a vehicle as an unauthorized gift from an Iraqi officer, and 
information that she had been denied employment by a federal investigative agency. 
(GE 8.) 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(SOR ¶ 2.d) Applicant denied that she operated a vehicle on base in violation of 
Command policies, as documented by the Army. She said she was authorized to use a 
car because she was an authorized escort on base. She said she used the particular 
car referenced in this allegation because it had air conditioning. She drove it seven to 
ten days and a security officer was with her. (Tr. 41; Answer; AE G, AE L.)  
 
Applicant submitted a letter from the Iraqi officer referenced in SOR ¶ 2.c above. 
He stated that the automobile was not a gift to her, but was a loaner car he authorized 
her to use for a few days. He said the allegations made against Applicant about this 
issue were false. (AE B.) According to the Army’s report, Applicant told the investigator 
that the officer had given the car to her as a gift. According to Command rules, 
interpreters were not allowed to operate vehicles on base. (GE 7.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.e) On May 6, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application (SCA). In Section 13A: Employment Activities, Applicant disclosed that she 
had worked for a federal contractor from April 2005 to September 2009. She stated the 
reason she left was: “Employment at Will, Investigation closed without adverse action. 
Termination and/or lapse of employer’s contract. Contract. [sic] Reduction of US Forces 
in Iraq.” (GE 1.) She answered “no” to questions inquiring whether, within the past 
seven years, she had been fired; quit a job after being told she would be fired; left a job 
by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct; or left a job by 
mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant denied that she falsified the above answer. She testified that when she 
left her position in September 2009, she was not told the reasons she was being 
removed. (Tr. 65.) She said she consulted an attorney, who advised her to use the 
above language in the 2015 SCA. She testified that she felt she should have mentioned 
the September 2009 incident report, which is why she wrote “incident report” on her 
copy of the 2015 SCA in the employment section referencing the job. She made the 
note to remind herself to mention it to the investigator when she was interviewed. 
Subsequently, she was unable to discuss the termination with the investigator during 
her May 2015 interview because it went too fast. (Tr. 45-46; 65-69; GE 1, AE M.) She 
acknowledged that she did not give the adverse information to the investigator after the 
interview. (Tr. 71.) She admitted that she made a mistake by not disclosing the 
termination and reasons in the SCA. (Tr. 65.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.f) Applicant denied that she falsified information during an Army 
interview in May 2015 about the 1997 theft. She testified that she did not tell the 
investigator that she voluntarily gave the young girl her credit card to use. (Tr. 74.) She 
submitted the affidavit from the girl attesting to that fact, although the girl also said that 
when she first meet with the police she stated that Applicant knew of the credit card 
transaction. (AE J.) According to the summary report of that interview, Applicant 
acknowledged that she was aware of the misuse of her credit card. (GE 4.)  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.g.) Applicant denied that the five allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e 
raised personal conduct security concerns. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Letters of Recommendation and Other Mitigation 
  
 Applicant submitted various certificates of achievement, documenting her 
accomplishments as a linguist while working in Iraq. (AE A, AE F, AE Q.) Numerous 
authors complimented Applicant’s outstanding performance, experience, loyalty, and 
impressive interpretative skills. (Answer; AE B, AE M, AE P.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
Iraq 
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
pronouncements concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE 1, including the 
following: Iraq faces many challenges fueled by sectarian and ethnic divisions. 
Numerous terrorist groups are increasingly active throughout Iraq. The Islamic State of 
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic State) controls some of the country’s territory. 
Threats of kidnapping and violence are high, and the Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens that all but essential travel to Iraq should be avoided. Additionally, human-rights 
related problems including disappearances, torture, denial of fair public trial, and limits 
on freedom of speech and expression have been noted. (HE 1; AE S.) 
 
Jordan 
 
Jordan is a small, Middle Eastern country governed by a constitutional monarchy.   
It has a developing economy. Jordan has a pro-Western foreign policy, and has had 
close relations with the United States for more than forty years. Torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, and restrictions on freedom of speech are 
Jordanian human rights problems. Despite aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Jordan remains high. Jordan cooperates with the 
United States in fighting international terrorism. Terrorists in Jordan target U.S. interests 
to exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE 2; AE T.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a decision in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Iraq and Jordan have internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly 
and contrary to U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant’s connections or relationships with 
the SOR-alleged individuals, who are citizens and/or residents of those two countries, 
have the potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a). Applicant’s relationships with 
individuals who serve in the Iraqi military create a potential conflict of interest between 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and [her] desire to 
help” individuals living in Iraq or Jordan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate the foreign influence 
security concerns arising in this case:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a) for any of 
the five allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR. All of the relationships arose during 
Applicant’s employment in Iraq and involved Iraqi nationals. Two of the allegations 
referenced associations with Iraqi military personnel, which could have easily placed 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, or government and the interests of the United States.      
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) provides mitigation for the allegations. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) 
analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States,” such that she “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest.” She has lived in the United States since 1970, about 47 years. She 
became a citizen in 1976. Her adult children and mother are U.S. citizens and residents. 
She owns a home and has financial investments in the United States. She does not 
have any assets in Iraq or Jordan. She obtained a master’s degree from a U.S. 
university in 1983. She has worked at various jobs in the United States, including as a 
translator for law firms and private companies. She is active in her community. She 
expressed a strong sense of loyalty and patriotism toward the United States.  
 
 Applicant testified that she has not had contact with the Iraqi officer alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a since 2011. The last time she had communication with an associate, who 
was born in Iraq and now resides in Jordan, was in 2010. She said she spoke to one 
Iraqi citizen she knew about a year ago, and another Iraqi citizen she knew in 2010. The 
other individual with whom she associated while in Iraq became a U.S. citizen. There is 
no evidence that she maintains contact with other Iraqi nationals. She has not returned 
to Iraq since leaving when her contract work for the U.S. Army ended. There is evidence 
to establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.e, as her contact with individuals in Iraq has been infrequent and casual since leaving 
the country in September 2009.    
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, 2.d, and 2.g, are supported by credible evidence. Applicant 
was convicted of a bribery felony in 1990 and a credit card fraud misdemeanor in 1997. 
Both crimes raise questions about Applicant’s judgment, integrity, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. In September 2009, she was released and 
terminated from her position as a contract linguist for allegations involving violations of 
employment rules, including improper relationships with Iraqi military personnel, which 
also raise judgment concerns. Applicant presented evidence from an Iraqi officer, who 
stated that he loaned a vehicle to her for work and did not give it to her as a gift. While 
that has some persuasive weight, the Army asserted that she gave them a contradictory 
statement and told them it was a gift. According to pertinent rules and policies, as a 
linguist she was prohibited from driving on base. Given this contradiction of facts, the 
evidence weighs in favor of the Government. The evidence establishes security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(d)(3) as to those five allegations.  
 
Applicant intentionally falsified or gave misleading information in response to an 
employment question on her May 2015 SCA, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e. She did not 
disclose that her employer terminated her in September 2009 for alleged misconduct, 
although she admitted that she knew that to be the basis for her termination in March 
2010. Instead, she falsely certified that the reason for leaving the position was a 
reduction in U.S. forces and made other inaccurate statements. The evidence 
establishes security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) as to this allegation. 
 
Applicant gave false or contradictory information to the Army investigator in May 
2015, when she said that she was unaware that her credit card was used without her 
authorization. According to the detailed investigative report, the young girl told the police 
that Applicant knew of the young girl’s fraudulent behavior. This more credibly explains 
Applicant’s assumption of guilt for the theft by deception, and her agreement to serve 
one year of probation and to pay $7,000 in restitution. Despite the contradictory 
statements, the evidence weighs in favor of the Government and establishes security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) as to SOR ¶ 2.f. 
   
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant did not make a prompt or good-faith effort to correct the 
misrepresentations she made on her 2015 SCA regarding her employment record. 
There is no evidence that she subsequently clarified to the investigator the information 
about her termination of employment in Iraq. Her explanation for pleading guilty to the 
theft charge is not credible, in view of the surrounding facts. Failing to disclose 
requested information during a security clearance investigation is not a minor offense. 
AG ¶ 17(a) and AG ¶ 17(c) do not provide mitigation for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.e or 
2.f.  
 
Applicant admitted that she should have disclosed the termination in the 2015 
SCA; however, she consistently denied the basis for termination in September 2009, 
and that her behaviors involved non-compliance with company policies. Instead, she 
asserted that the cited violations were false accusations. Her defense raises questions 
about her judgment and ability to take responsibility for her actions, which evidence is 
necessary to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d) for SOR ¶¶ 2.c, and 2.d. AG ¶ 
17(d) provides some mitigation for the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a because Applicant 
expressed remorse for her mistake in committing the bribery felony in 1990.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 Applicant is an intelligent and educated 70-year-old woman. Although she was 
born in Iraq, she has been a U.S. citizen and resident for over 40 years. She has strong 
connections to the United States through her community and employment positions. 
According to letters of recommendation, she displayed professionalism and linguistic 
competency while working for a federal contractor. She received numerous certificates 
of achievement for that work. She acknowledged that she developed associations with 
Iraqi nationals while in Iraq from 2005 to 2009, some of which raised security concerns. 
However, she has not had ongoing contact with any of those individuals since leaving 
Iraq about nine years ago, nor has she returned to Iraq since then. The likelihood that 
similar foreign influence security concerns will arise is significantly diminished.      
 
 The more serious security concerns raised in this case under the personal 
conduct guideline involve Applicant’s falsification of her 2015 SCA; failing to disclose 
relevant information to an investigator during a security interview; two criminal 
convictions; and a pattern of employment problems while working in Iraq. Applicant 
expressed remorse over her 1990 criminal conviction and failure to disclose requested 
information in the SCA. She asserted that the employment problems, alleged in the 
SOR, were based on false accusations and personality problems she had with other 
linguists. While there may be some truth to those assertions, her refusal to acknowledge 
accountability for any of the problems she encountered while in Iraq is troublesome. Her 
statement that she pleaded guilty to a theft in 1997 in order to prevent a young girl from 
going to jail is also suspect and concerning, especially since her version of the facts is 
inconsistent with an investigator’s report. At this time, she has not provided sufficient 
evidence of rehabilitation to mitigate her history of personal conduct issues spanning 
from 1990 to 2009. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance or assignment in sensitive duties. She 
mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for foreign influence, but not 
those raised under the guideline for personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:       For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a through 2.g:         Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
