1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02545 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on April 8, 
2015. On November 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was initially taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the AGs were updated 
and cancelled the AGs effective September 2006.  This decision will be decided based 
on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to consider this case under the 
AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the same outcome.  
  
 On November 30, 2016, Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
May 12, 2017. The case was assigned to me on that same date. On May 16, 2017, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for May 31, 2017. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered one exhibit, which 
was admitted without objection as Government (Gov) Exhibit 1.  Applicant offered 18 
exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - R, without objection. The 
2 
 
Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts regarding the 
country of Pakistan. The administrative notice document was marked as Administrative 
Notice Document (Admin Not) 1. Applicant did not object to the administrative notice 
documents. The transcript was received on June 7, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Administrative Notice – Pakistan     
 
  The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge 
and matters not subject to reasonable dispute.  
 
  Pakistan continues to have serious human rights problems including extrajudicial 
and targeted killings, disappearances, torture, lack of rule of law (including lack of due 
process, poor implementation and enforcement of laws, frequent mob violence and 
vigilante justice, and sectarian violence). Government and police corruption as well as 
rape, domestic violence, sexual harassment, honor crimes, and discrimination against 
women and girls remain serious problems. Lack of government accountability is a 
problem. Abuses often went unpunished fostering a culture of impunity. Authorities 
seldom punish government officials for human rights violations. (Admin Not 1)  
 
  In 2015, an assortment of terrorist groups attempted to hide or operate from 
portions of Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas, a mountainous region along 
Pakistan’s northwest border with Afghanistan. Pakistan launched military operations to 
eradicate terrorist safe havens, although their impact was uneven. As of February 2015, 
the U.S. State Department warned U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to 
Pakistan, because the presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups 
poses a potential danger to U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. Further concerns about 
Pakistan include the potential for weapons of mass destruction trafficking, and 
proliferation. (Admin Not 1)  
     
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.b, 
and denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c.   
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor who 
is applying for a security clearance for the first time. He has been with his employer 
since February 2015. His highest level of education is a bachelor’s degree. He is 
married and has two children, ages seven and five. (Note: The facts in this decision do 
not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or locations in order to 
protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information.)  
 
Applicant was born and raised in Pakistan. He has seven siblings. His father 
passed away when he was 13. Upon graduating high school, he moved away from 
home and attended a university in Pakistan. Applicant met his wife in 2007. She is a 
United States citizen. They married that same year. In 2009, Applicant was awarded a 
3 
 
Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science with honors. His wife applied to sponsor 
Applicant as a permanent resident in the United States. (AE B)   
 
In December 2009, he and his wife moved to the United States after he received 
his permanent resident status.  When he arrived in the United States, he pursued 
further certifications in his line of work in order to provide for his family.  He also worked 
several jobs while pursuing his certifications. He and his wife have two children who 
were born and reside in the United States.  (Tr. 19; AE B) 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in March 2013. He applied for a U.S. passport in 
July 2013. It will not expire until July 2023.  Applicant surrendered his Pakistani 
passport to his facility security officer (FSO) in 2013. (AE B – AE E) From September 
2013 to February 2015, Applicant worked for a federal agency as a contractor. In 
February 2015, he accepted a job with his current employer. (Gov 1; AE B) Applicant 
does not own any property or financial accounts in Pakistan. All of his assets are in the 
United States. He has never worked in Pakistan and never served in the Pakistani 
military.  (Tr. 25, 32, 37-38) 
  
The issues in the SOR, allege Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Pakistan, and his  
four brothers, and three sisters are citizens and residents of Pakistan. It also alleges 
that Applicant maintains close and continuing contact with a friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Pakistan.  Applicant’s mother is a permanent resident of the United States. 
She lives with Applicant and his family.  She has lived in the United States over the past 
two years. Once she is eligible, she hopes to apply for U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
Five of Applicant’s siblings in Pakistan are in the process of applying for 
permanent resident status. His mother is the sponsor.  Three of his brothers, ages 21, 
22, and 24, who are currently college students and two sisters, ages 27 and 28, who 
have college degrees, but are unemployed, are being sponsored.  Applicant also has a 
brother who is married and resides in Pakistan. Applicant has not contacted this brother 
for two years.  Applicant also has a sister who is married and resides in Pakistan. The 
last time he contacted her was 2 and a half years ago. Applicant testified that his 
married brother and sister have their own lives.  None of his siblings serve in the 
Pakistani military or work for the government.  (Tr. 21-25; AE N - R)  
 
Applicant was close friends with his sister’s father-in-law who is a citizen of and 
resides in  Afghanistan. After moving to the United States, he has had no contact with 
him. Currently, he has no close friends who are citizens of and reside in Pakistan. (Tr. 
39, 38-39) Applicant’s in-laws are United States citizens and live in the United States 
near Applicant and his family. His wife has no close relatives that live outside the United 
States. (Tr. 39)  
 
Applicant provided several letters of recommendation. The vice principal of his 
children’s school states that Applicant is respectful and is very involved in the education 
of his children. A senior information analyst, who serves as Applicant’s testing team 
lead since February 2015, states Applicant works well with the team and completes his 
assignments in a timely manner. Applicant’s supervisor from his previous job notes 
Applicant is “a very conscientious person that strives to do his best.” He states that 
4 
 
Applicant was a top performer and is honest. His attendance and punctuality were 
excellent. He was preparing to give Applicant more responsibility, but Applicant left the 
company for a better opportunity. He recommends Applicant for a security clearance. 
Applicant’s landlord and his father-in-law said similar favorable things about Applicant. 
Two former coworkers also provided favorable letters on Applicant’s behalf. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
5 
 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE B: Foreign Influence 
 
   AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. They include: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign  country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; 
 
(d) counterintelligence information, whether classified or unclassified, that 
indicates the individual's access to classified information or eligibility for a 
sensitive position may involve unacceptable risk to national security; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
6 
 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence entity;  
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(b) apply. The mere possession of 
close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has seven siblings who are 
citizens of and reside in Pakistan. His relationship with his family creates a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because 
Pakistan is a known haven for terrorist groups and has serious human rights problems.  
Applicant’s contacts with his family in Pakistan also creates a potential conflict of 
interest between his obligation to protect classified information and his desire to help his 
family members by providing that information.  
 
With regard to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1(c), I find there is no longer an issue 
because Applicant has had no contact with his friend in Afghanistan since moving to the 
United States eight years ago.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. They include: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
7 
 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I find AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) apply to Applicant’s case. It is clear that Applicant 
has ties of affection and obligation to his siblings who reside in Pakistan. However, it is 
unlikely Applicant will have to choose between the interests of his siblings and the 
interests of the United States. Applicant’s family members are not associated or 
affiliated with the Pakistani government. His brothers are students. His sisters do not 
work and live at home. He is not close with his siblings who are married and have 
families of their own. The family member with whom he is closest is his mother. His 
mother is now a permanent resident of the United States. She has lived in the United 
States with Applicant and his family for over two years. Applicant’s immediate family 
members, his wife and two children are citizens of reside in the United States. Applicant 
lives in the United States and all of his assets are in the United States.    
  
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has deep and longstanding ties in the 
United States. Applicant has lived in the United States for eight years.  He became a 
U.S. citizen in 2013. His wife was born and raised in the United States. His children 
were born and are being raised in the United States. All of his professional life has been 
in the United States. All of his financial assets are located in the United States. Aside 
from his siblings, all of Applicant’s ties are in the United States. His closest ties, his wife, 
children and mother live in the United States. His in-laws are citizens of and reside in 
the United States. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. 
interests. Security concerns under Foreign Influence are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant moved to the 
United States in 2009 with his wife, a United States citizen, after graduating college.  
When he first moved to the United States, he worked several low-paying jobs while 
achieving certification training in order to succeed in his career. His professional life 
started in the United States. He became a U.S. citizen in 2013.  His two children were 
born in the United States.  Applicant and his family have built a life in the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s mother resides with Applicant and is a permanent resident of the 
United States. She has lived in the United States for the past two years and intends to 
apply for U.S. citizenship. She is sponsoring five of Applicant’s siblings to become 
permanent residents of the United States. Applicant is not as close to his two siblings 
who intend to remain in Pakistan. They are married and have their own lives. He talks to 
them every few years.  Applicant surrendered his Pakistani passport to his FSO.  
 
Several of Applicant’s supervisors and coworkers have attested to his good 
character and work ethic. They recommend him for a security clearance. Although 
Applicant has siblings residing in Pakistan, his immediate family members and all of his 
investments are located in the United States. Applicant’s longstanding ties in the United 
States indicate that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. 
interests.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:   For Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
