 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07290 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 28, 2015, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines. 1 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 30, 2016. She answered the 
SOR in writing on July 13, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 26, 2016, and I 
received the case assignment on October 6, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
February 27, 2017, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 17, 2017. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through M, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 5, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request 
to keep the record open until March 31, 2017, to submit additional matters. On March 
24, 2017, she submitted Exhibits N to R, without objection. The record closed on March 
31, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR, with explanations. She also provided additional information to 
support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She has three sons. Applicant is not married. She is a 
production coordinator for a defense contractor earning $52,000 annually. She has 
worked for her employer for 23 years. She is living in her home, which has been 
foreclosed upon by the bank. She has an associate college degree. (Tr. 32, 34-36, 70; 
Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has extra income because the father of Applicant’s third child’s died on 
the job before the son was born 17 years ago. The child receives $772 monthly in 
Social Security survivor benefits and $567 biweekly in worker’s compensation benefits 
that Applicant uses to support herself and her son. That is $1,906 of compensation her 
son receives monthly. The total is $22,872 annually. The Social Security benefits 
terminate in a short while when the son becomes 18 years of age. These funds are 
deposited directly into Applicant’s checking account to be used for living expenses. With 
her job income and her son’s income, Applicant had $74,872 annually in income. (Tr. 
39, 40; Exhibits 1-5)  
 
 Applicant has seven delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $47,535, 
including the mortgage on her home. The remaining debts are a car loan and five credit 
card debts. She stopped paying on all her debts in 2014 when her house was being 
foreclosed and she consulted an attorney about filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He advised 
her not to pay any debts. She did not pay the mortgage from 2014 onward. During the 
time from 2014 to 2016 she moved out of the house twice and returned to maintain the 
property. She has not paid any of the debts listed in the SOR. Applicant filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in March 2016. Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy listed total liabilities of 
$167,263. (Tr. 4157; Exhibits 2-5, B, D) 
 
 Applicant purchased her house in July 2010 for $119,000. Applicant’s oldest son 
helped with the expenses of the house. She also had a companion whose income of 
about $2,800 monthly helped her afford the house. He moved out after 16 months and 
she lost that income. In November 2012 her son moved out of her house and moved 
into his own home. Her monthly mortgage payments were $1,150. In July 2013 the 
 
3 
 
 
bathroom needed repairs and she could not afford the mortgage and paying for those 
repairs. Applicant started to have a difficult time paying her expenses. She began using 
credit cards to pay for her monthly purchases. She realized she was overextended 
financially and buying the house was a bad decision. (Tr. 41-50, 77, 85; Exhibits 1-5, B, 
I) 
 
 Applicant did not pay the full mortgage payment that month, submitting $300 less 
than required. In August 2013 she sent in a complete payment, but it was returned by 
the bank as was the July payment because the mortgage lender wanted the exact 
amounts owed for each month. The bank also charged late fees and interest. Her 
financial situation worsened at that point. Applicant made payments on her other debts 
during the succeeding year. She also submitted a request for mortgage assistance. She 
was approved, sent in the new payment, and a month later the mortgage lender sent a 
letter to Applicant telling her she was in default on the loan and the house was in 
foreclosure proceedings (Subparagraph 1.a). For the next year Applicant tried to sell the 
house without success. (Tr. 42-49; Exhibits 1-5, I, J, K) 
 
 Applicant then consulted an attorney in September 2014 who advised her with 
her debt load that Chapter 7 bankruptcy was the best method for her to resolve her 
debt. Applicant moved out of her house and into an apartment, thinking the house was 
going to sell. Three days after moving, Applicant received a letter from some court, she 
testified, telling her the foreclosure was dismissed. Applicant then broke her lease and 
paid the fee so she could move back into her house to maintain it until it sold. (Tr. 49-
51; Exhibit P-R) 
 
 While living in her house payment free Applicant did not use her work income or 
the payments for her son to pay off other debts. She was not certain why she did not 
make payments, but was doing what her attorney told her to do. During this period she 
replaced the carpet in the house because someone might buy the house. She also 
purchased cars for each of her sons. One car cost $3,500, the second car $2,000, and 
the third son received a car costing $3,800. She paid cash for all cars. Her car had a 
bad transmission she could not afford to repair, so she leased a 2015 vehicle for $420 
monthly. She surrendered the vehicle before the lease ended and owed the balance of 
the lease amount of $6,002 (Subparagraph 1.b). Applicant put that amount into her 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She then purchased a used 2013 model car after her bankruptcy 
was discharged in July 2016. (Tr. 51-57, 68-70; Exhibits 1-5, H) 
 
 Applicant’s debts included the purchase of four computers that were placed on a 
charge account with the manufacturer for $4,603 (Subparagraph 1.d). She did not pay 
that debt either and placed it in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The four other credit cards of 
$4,801 (Subparagraph 1.c), $3,016 (Subparagraph 1.e), $2,495 (Subparagraph 1.f), 
and $670 (Subparagraph 1.g) were not paid by Applicant and she included them in the 
bankruptcy. (Tr. 72; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 After her bankruptcy was concluded, Applicant has been paying her monthly 
debts regularly. Applicant submitted a copy of a budget she prepared. She admitted 
 
4 
 
 
there were four other debts listed in her credit reports she has not paid, including a $115 
debt to a hospital. Only the $115 was included in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing. She 
does not have credit cards. She uses a debit card for purchases. Applicant did pay her 
student loans in full in October 2016 and they are not the subject of an allegation in the 
SOR. She also has a health savings account for medical expenses. The only financial 
counseling Applicant received was part of the bankruptcy filing process. She stated she 
would only rent an apartment in the future because she decided she could not afford a 
house. (Tr. 63, 64-67, 73, 91; Exhibits D, E, F, I, L, N, O)   
 
 Applicant submitted six character letters from family, friends, and co-workers. 
One letter is signed by 10 co-workers. They attest to her integrity, skill, and excellent 
work ethic. They describe Applicant as honest and courteous. They also state they are 
aware of her past financial difficulties regarding her house. These character references 
also state Applicant is strong, independent, and raised three sons as a single mother. 
(Exhibit M)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators.  
 
 Applicant accumulated $47,535 in delinquent debt from 2014 to the present.. 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts listed in the SOR. She had an unpaid mortgage 
on a house she purchased in 2010. She did not pay the mortgage on the house after 
2014 and lived there for free. She had a car loan she did not pay, along with five credit 
card balances she did not pay as required. Meanwhile, she purchased, with the money 
she would have paid on her mortgage and debts, used cars for her three sons and 
herself. She could not afford the house without the income from her companion and her 
oldest son, both of whom lived in the house for many months. After they moved out, the 
burden fell on Applicant and she could not afford home repairs, the mortgage, and her 
other debts. She stopped paying all of them. The evidence raises all four of the above 
security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Five conditions are not applicable and the 
sixth condition is not relevant:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s behavior is recent and continued until she filed and was discharged in 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2016. The financial condition was not beyond her control. She 
decided to purchase a house and later found out she could not afford it, even with an 
income in the $60,000 to $70,000 range without the additional income from her former 
companion and her son. She tried to sell the house in 2014 but was unsuccessful 
because of the approval needed by the mortgage lender, which was slow in coming. 
Having purchased the house in 2010, she should have taken action sooner. Meanwhile, 
she replaced the carpet in the home, rented two apartments when she thought she 
should vacate the house, moved back to the house, and purchased at least four cars for 
her family members. She did not act in a responsible financial manner.  
 
Applicant did not initiate a good-faith effort to repay her debts. Instead, she did 
not pay them and finally filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2015, which was discharged in 
July 2016. She spent too much money, had too many debts, and could not pay them. 
Her car purchases alone show she was not acting responsibly under her financial 
circumstances.  
 
Applicant’s past financial problems were discharged, not controlled by her 
actions. She had no legitimate basis to contest any debt. With her job and the money for 
her son from Social Security and state workers compensation, she had sufficient funds 
to pay her debts. She did not do so. She did not seek financial counseling before the 
problem became overwhelming. Her only financial counseling was done as part of the 
bankruptcy, required by law, not done voluntarily to solve her financial problem. All her 
actions between 2010 and the present show she could not properly manage her money. 
No mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not act financially in a 
responsible way. She did not manage her finances responsibly during a six-year period. 
She contends the circumstances have changed now that her children do not depend on 
her for support and her debts were discharged in bankruptcy. However, her past 
spending patterns, not paying her mortgage and at the same time purchasing 
automobiles for her family, are not actions showing that she knows how to manage her 
income responsibly. Based on the past performance, it is likely the behavior will repeat 
itself.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
