1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08780 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on August 29, 2016. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on August 30, 
2016.  Applicant received the FORM on September 6, 2016. He had 30 days to submit 
a response to the FORM. He did not submit matters in response to the FORM. On 
October 31, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and was assigned to 
me on June 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
   
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 1)  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor.  He 
has worked for his employer since October 1997. He has held a security clearance 
since 2005. His highest level of education is a Master’s degree. He is married and has 
two children, ages 13 and 11. (Item 2, Item 3)   
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
On May 7, 2010, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) as part of a periodic background investigation. In response to Section 
23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity on his SF 86, Applicant listed that he used 
marijuana in June 2006. He indicated he only used marijuana on that one occasion. 
(Item 2, Section 26) He subsequently received a security clearance.  
 
On April 28, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for another periodic background investigation. In 
response to Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, “In the last 7 years, have 
you illegally used any drugs or controlled substances? Use of a drug or controlled 
substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling swallowing, experimenting with or 
otherwise consuming any drug or controlled substance?” Applicant answered “yes.”  He 
explained: “Socially I have used marijuana on rare occasions. Only 3 times in the last 
20+ years and twice in the last 7 years.” He listed marijuana use in July 2011 during his 
40th birthday party and in April 2015 while out with friends in Colorado. (Item 3, Section 
23) 
 
In response to the statement in section 23: “Provide explanation of why you 
intend or do not intend to use this drug or controlled substance in the future.” Applicant 
responded: 
 
I have no specific plans or intentions to use marijuana again. However, I 
am not opposed to it and the possibility remains that I would use it again.  
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted his marijuana use in July 2006, July 
2011, and April 2015. He also admitted that he used marijuana in 2015 after being 
granted a DOD security clearance. (Item 1) 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
The allegation under the Personal Conduct concern involves Applicant’s 
unauthorized use of an Apple operating system on his non-Apple personal computer. 
He copied, installed, and used a proprietary Apple operating system on his non-Apple 
computer, circumventing Apple’s copyright. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
admits that he did this, but states that he stopped using Apple operating systems on 
non-Apple computers in 2016. (Item 1) 
 
3 
 
Applicant listed this conduct in response to Section 27: Use of Information 
Technology Systems on his May 2010 security clearance application. He circumvented 
a lawfully purchased retail copy of the Apple Snow Leopard operating system on his 
personal computer to get around a copy protection scheme Apple used to prevent 
installation on non-Apple hardware. This occurred in September 2009. (Item 2, Section 
27) 
 
Applicant also listed that he circumvented copyright protection by means of 
decryption at various times since January 2005. Applicant acknowledged that this is a 
violation of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. He indicates in section 27 of his May 
2010 security clearance application: 
 
This was done for personal entertainment reasons and the decrypted data 
was never provided to others. The specific reasons are enumerated 
include: [1] digitally enhancing DVD movies that I legally purchased (up-
conversion to high definition) [2] copying DVD movies for use in my SUV 
(to prevent media damage in the vehicle) [3] copying DVD movies for use 
on my iPod [4] removing DRM from music purchased on iTunes to allow 
unrestricted use of the music on operating systems that weren’t supported 
by Apple (namely Linux). This is something I have done many times (> 
100) and will continue to do as long as DRM or copy protection inhibit my 
personal use of lawfully purchased media. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:  
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any drug abuse;  
 
AG & 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
5 
 
AG & 25(g) any illegal drug abuse after being granted a security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant used marijuana in July 2006, July 2011, and April 2015. He used 
marijuana on a recreational basis. AG & 25(a) applies. AG & 25(c) also applies because 
Applicant possessed marijuana in conjunction with his use.  AG ¶ 25(g) applies because 
Applicant used marijuana after being granted a security clearance.  
 
It is noted that Applicant’s last use of marijuana in April 2015 occurred in a state 
where marijuana use is legal. On October 25, 2014, a Director of National Intelligence 
Memorandum, “Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use,” advises that 
legislative changes by some states and the District of Columbia do not alter federal law 
or existing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines. An individual’s disregard of federal 
law pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains adjudicatively 
relevant in national security determinations. Marijuana is identified as a controlled 
substance under the Federal Controlled Substances Act (title II of the Comprehensive 
Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act) 21 U.S.C. 801-971 (1970). In other words, 
under federal law, use of marijuana remains unlawful. Therefore, Applicant’s April 2015 
marijuana, while legal in the state where it occurred, remained illegal under federal law.   
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
  
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant’s last illegal drug use occurred in April 
2015. I consider this use to be recent. His marijuana use occurred while possessing an 
active security clearance. The use occurred in April 2015, the same month that 
Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application. Applicant indicated 
on his April 2015 security clearance application that he has no specific plans or 
intentions to use marijuana again. However, he further stated that he is not opposed to 
6 
 
it and there is a possibility that he may use marijuana again. Based on his statements 
about future use, I cannot conclude that any future marijuana use by Applicant is 
unlikely to recur.    
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply because Applicant did not demonstrate an intent to 
stop abusing marijuana in the future. On his 2015 security clearance application, he  
equivocates and says he might use marijuana in the future.  He did not present a signed 
statement of intent to refrain from marijuana use with an acknowledgement any violation 
would result in an automatic revocation of his security clearance. Applicant was given a 
break during his security clearance re-investigation in 2010. He was allowed to keep his 
security clearance despite his disclosure of marijuana use in 2006. He continued to use 
marijuana after the 2010 re-investigation. Applicant does not appear to understand the 
concerns related to his illegal marijuana use or the security concerns related to his use 
of marijuana while holding a security clearance.  Applicant did not mitigate the security 
concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
  
 The following disqualifying condition applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Between 2006 to 2015, Applicant circumvented Apple’s copyright protections in 
order to use a proprietary Apple operating system on his non-Apple personal computer. 
He also admits to violating the Digital Millennium Copyright Act pertaining to the 
downloading of movie DVDs and music.   
  
 The following mitigating condition applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
7 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 Applicant stopped circumventing Apple’s copyright protections in 2015.  While his 
behavior is not condoned, his actions were for his own personal use. Applicant 
mitigated the issues raised under Guideline E.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s lengthy 
career with a DOD contractor. I considered that Applicant fully disclosed his illegal drug 
use on his security clearance applications. I considered that he used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance. While Applicant has not used marijuana since April 2015, 
his statement indicating that he could not rule out the possibility of using marijuana in 
the future on his security clearance application provides reason for concern. Applicant 
did not submit a statement of intent to refrain from illegal drug use. For these reasons, 
concerns remain under the drug involvement concern.  Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns raised under personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
        
8 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
