 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  (Redacted) )     ISCR Case No. 15-03609 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of France and the United States. After being raised in 
France, he moved to the United States in August 2012. He retains strong connections to 
France, both familial and personal, but they are normal and not unusual. Applicant 
renewed his French passport in January 2016, but there is no evidence that he used a 
French passport to enter the United States or that he retains dual citizenship to protect 
financial or business interests in France. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant 
a security clearance to Applicant. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 9, 2015, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On August 4, 2016, DOHA amended the SOR to add two allegations under 
Guideline B. Applicant responded to the new allegations on August 22, 2016. On 
September 29, 2016, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant. On 
September 30, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for October 20, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Nine Government exhibits (GEs 1-9) were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant submitted no exhibits, but he testified 
as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 26, 2016. In response to Applicant’s 
testimony that he had renewed his French passport in January 2016, the Government 
moved to amend the SOR to add an allegation under Guideline C (SOR ¶ 1.f) that 
Applicant continues to possess a valid French passport that he renewed in 2016. Finding 
good cause, I amended the SOR under the authority of ¶ E3.1.17. The record was held 
open for 30 days for Applicant to submit evidence in response to the amendment. No 
documents were received by the deadline, and the record closed on November 20, 2016. 
 
 While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative 
guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made 
on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AG. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The amended SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant is a dual citizen of 
France and the United States (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he applied for and received a French 
passport in 2005 that was valid to July 4, 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he voted in French 
elections in 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c); that he received medical benefits while employed in France 
from September 2007 to July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.d); that he earned a retirement stipend from 
France that will be paid monthly beginning in November 2049 (SOR ¶ 1.e); and that he 
possesses a valid French passport that he renewed in January 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.f). Under 
Guideline B, the SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse is a French citizen residing in the 
United States (SOR ¶ 2.a); that his mother is a dual citizen of France and the United 
States residing in France (SOR ¶ 2.b); that his father is a resident citizen of France (SOR 
¶ 2.d); that his brother is a dual citizen of France and the United States (SOR ¶ 2.d); that 
his mother-in-law is a resident citizen of France (SOR ¶ 2.e); that Applicant maintains a 
bank account in France with an approximate value of $135,000 (SOR ¶ 2.f); that he has 
a connection to, and contacts with, two French nationals affiliated with a French national 
research institute (SOR ¶¶ 2.g and 2.h).  
 
 Applicant admits the Guideline C allegations and the Guideline B allegations 
concerning the foreign citizenship and/or residency of his family members. He denies that 
 
 
3 
he maintains a French bank account with an approximate value of $135,000 or that he 
has close connections to two French researchers. He maintains that while he had a past 
connection, as both had served as advisors for his doctorate studies, he has only formal, 
very intermittent contact with them at present. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the Guideline C allegations and to the foreign citizenship 
and/or residency of his family members as alleged in Guideline B are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old computer scientist who has worked as a research 
engineer for a defense contractor since August 2014. He applied for a DOD security 
clearance in September 2014. (GE 1.)  
 
A native French citizen from birth, Applicant acquired his U.S. citizenship through 
his mother, a dual citizen of her native United States and France. His father is a native 
French citizen. Applicant’s birth abroad was registered with the U.S. Consulate in 
September 1985. Applicant has one sibling, an older brother, who was born in the United 
States in 1982 and has dual citizenship with the United States and France. (GE 1; Tr. 35.) 
 
Applicant was raised and educated in France except for two years between ages 
8 and 10 when he lived in the United States. (GE 1; Tr. 75.) He held both French and U.S. 
passports. His latest French passport was renewed in January 2016. (Tr. 33-34.) His 
latest U.S. passport of record was issued in August 2005 for ten years. (GE 1.) 
 
From September 2007 to February 2011, Applicant worked as a salaried doctoral 
student at a national government-funded scientific and technical research institute 
(hereafter French research institute), which was under the supervision of two ministries 
of the French government. (GEs 1, 4; Tr. 38.) Applicant worked with French research 
scientists, including with the institute’s current executive officer for research and 
technology (French scientist X, identified in SOR ¶ 2.g) and with a permanent full-time 
researcher (French scientist Y, identified in SOR ¶ 2.h), both of whom served as advisors 
for his doctoral studies.1 (GEs 1, 7.) At the time, the French research institute had a joint 
project with a Chinese university and a Chinese-French laboratory. (GE 5.) In September 
2008, French scientist Y became the institute’s permanent full-time researcher at a 
Chinese university. (GE 8.) Applicant traveled to China on his French passport to meet 
with French research scientist Y in November 2008, June 2009, November 2009, and 
June 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 39.) Applicant did not perform any technical work or publish papers 
with Chinese citizens or maintain any close friendships with people he met in China. (GEs 
1, 2; Tr. 27, 29.) 
                                                 
1 French research scientist Y indicated on his curriculum vitae dated August 14, 2012, that he supervised 
Applicant’s doctorate through a research grant from October 2007 to April 2011. He moved from France to 
China in September 2008, and in July 2012, he became the French research institute’s permanent full-time 
researcher at an institute affiliated with the Chinese Academy of Sciences. (GE 8.) 
 
 
4 
Applicant worked as a post-doctoral researcher from April 2011 to August 2012 at 
a public French university. He received medical benefits and also earned a small 
retirement stipend valued at approximately $10,000 from his employment in France. 
Payout of the retirement funds is expected to begin in November 2049. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant married his spouse, a French native citizen, in April 2012. In September 
2012, they moved to the United States for Applicant’s new job as an adjunct professor in 
computer science at a private university. (GE 1; Tr. 51.) His spouse obtained her U.S. 
permanent residency in approximately March 2013. (Tr. 75.) 
 
In August 2014, Applicant began working for his current employer. (GE 1.) He had 
sought an academic position or research-oriented employment in either the United States 
or France. (GE 3; Tr. 53.) He was offered a position by a company in France, but he 
wanted to remain in the United States, and his work for the U.S. defense contractor would 
be more challenging. (GE 2; Tr. 31.) 
 
On September 12, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He disclosed his possession of 
then valid U.S. and French passports that were scheduled to expire in July 2015. He 
admitted that he had taken no action to renounce his French citizenship “due to [his] 
family ties to France (Paternal side and Spouse).” Applicant disclosed the French 
citizenship of his spouse, father, and mother-in-law and the French and U.S. dual 
citizenship of his mother and brother. He disclosed his parents’ residency and 
employment in France. His father works at a medical center and his mother at a school, 
and he indicated that he has weekly contact with his parents. Applicant also has weekly 
contact with his brother, a U.S. resident, but he indicated that he did not know his brother’s 
employer. Applicant reported weekly contact by telephone with his mother-in-law in 
France. In response to whether he had close or continuing contact with a foreign national 
within  the last seven years with whom he or his spouse was bound by affection, influence, 
common interests, and/or obligation, Applicant listed five persons in Europe with whom 
he had personal relations. Among his references, he included his brother-in-law, who is 
a French citizen residing and working in Switzerland. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
 Concerning foreign financial interests, Applicant indicated on his SF 86 that he and 
his spouse had about $135,000 in wage earnings and inheritance in a bank account in 
France. He disclosed his former employment with the French national research institute; 
that he and his spouse had received medical benefits from France under its universal 
healthcare system during their residency and employment in France between September 
2007 and July 2012; and that he has a future retirement benefit of approximately $10,000 
from past employment with the French government with payout to begin in November 
2049. Applicant responded affirmatively to an inquiry concerning attendance or 
participation in any foreign conferences, trade shows, seminars, or meetings in the last 
seven years. He reported research collaboration with foreign computer scientists in 
November 2007 and his attendance at conferences abroad in September 2009, May 
2011, June 2012, and July 2014. He reported that he had sponsored his spouse’s 
immigration to the United States, and that he had voted in France’s presidential election 
 
 
5 
in April 2012 when he was living in France, but explained that he was currently ineligible 
to vote in France. Among his foreign travels, Applicant listed a trip to France to see his 
parents in July 2014. (GE 1.) 
 
 When interviewed by an authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on November 4, 2014, Applicant explained that he has maintained 
“circumstantial” dual citizenship since birth because he has never had a reason to 
renounce either his U.S. or French citizenship. He denied any allegiance to one country 
over the other. While he did not believe renunciation of French citizenship was possible 
and expressed a preference to retain it, he indicated that he would consider renouncing 
it if his foreign citizenship meant he would be ineligible for a security clearance. Applicant 
stated that he would relinquish his foreign passport to security officials at work if required. 
He recalled using his French passport to travel to China and France, but using his U.S. 
passport on a trip to Canada in June 2013 for tourism. Applicant verified the information 
on his SF 86 about his contacts with foreign nationals, and expressed his belief that no 
one outside of his family knew that he was under consideration for a national security 
position. Applicant related that he had not been asked by an unauthorized person to 
provide any sensitive or proprietary information. Applicant explained that his travel to 
China for the French research institute was for professional reasons, and he had only 
incidental contact with Chinese nationals. He reported no problems at the border or 
contacts with security, military, or police officials in China. Concerning his and his 
spouse’s reported $135,000 in bank deposits in France, Applicant admitted that the 
financial interest was important to them, although if required, he would close his account 
and deposit the funds in a U.S.-based bank. As U.S. residents, Applicant explained that 
his and his spouse’s medical insurance in France had been cancelled. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant renewed his French passport for convenience (i.e., shorter lines at the 
airport, ease in entering European Union countries) in January 2016, although aware that 
he could travel to France on a U.S. passport as a dual citizen. (Tr. 33-34.) He believed 
that his security clearance had been denied, and assumed that he had only a small 
chance of success on appeal. Applicant testified that the understood the concerns about 
the United States’ inability to track travel on his French passport and indicated that he 
would “rescind” his French passport if granted security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 56-58.) 
He had not told his employer that he has a valid foreign passport. (Tr. 58.) After a 
discussion of the issues surrounding possession of a valid foreign passport, I held the 
record open for 30 days to provide Applicant an opportunity to determine what he wanted 
to do regarding his valid foreign passport. As noted above, he submitted no post-hearing 
matters. 
 
 Applicant travels to France approximately once every two years to visit his parents. 
(Tr. 33-34, 42, 54.) He has not been asked for any scientific or sensitive information during 
any of his trips to France. He testified that if approached for such information, he would 
not respond to inquiries, would not continue contact with them, and would report such 
attempts to his employer. (Tr. 43-45.) When asked what he would do if presented with a 
conflict between U.S. and French interests, he testified that he understands he cannot 
provide proprietary information about his work for the United States. However, he also 
 
 
6 
explained that his current DOD-sponsored work involves collaboration with foreign 
researchers, is not classified, and is not subject to export controls, so such restrictions do 
not apply to his current program. (Tr. 49-50.) 
 
 Applicant is in contact with his parents every one to two weeks. His mother 
currently teaches in a public high school in France. (Tr. 43.) His father works in a private 
medical facility and has no connection to the French government. He evaluates the ability 
of people to perform their jobs or transitions them to new employment. Applicant’s brother 
is a graphic designer who designs video games. He has lived and worked in the United 
States for the past 12-15 years and has no involvement with the French government. (Tr. 
45-46.) Applicant’s parents own a home in the same U.S. state where Applicant’s 
maternal grandmother and his brother currently reside. To Applicant’s knowledge, his 
parents intend to move to the United States when they retire. (Tr. 74.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a French resident citizen who does not work for the 
French government. Applicant speaks with his mother-in-law about once a month. His 
spouse has more frequent contact with her mother. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 Applicant has “very intermittent and at best professional and not heavily sustained” 
contact with French research scientists X and Y. Usually in response to their emails, 
Applicant updates them about his activities, including his research, about once a year. 
(Tr. 28-29, 69.) Applicant no longer has any official affiliation or work relationship with the 
French research institute or any employee of the institute. (Tr. 41-42, 48.) 
 
 After performing some cursory but he believes accurate research, Applicant 
understands that it is not possible for him to rescind his French citizenship as a native-
born French citizen with family currently residing in France. (Tr. 31-32.) Applicant has not 
voted in a French election since 2012, and he does not intend to vote in any foreign 
elections in the future. (Tr. 34-35.) He has voted in every major U.S. election since 2005. 
(Tr. 73.) He expressed “every intention to stay in the United States indefinitely.” (Tr. 74.)  
 
 As of October 2016, Applicant and his spouse had approximately $110,000 in bank 
deposits in France, of which less than $10,000 belonged to him. He and his spouse have 
a marriage contract that separates these assets. (Tr. 28, 47.) Applicant testified that “odds 
are good that [he] will eventually close [his one bank account in France] in the near future.” 
(Tr. 48.) Applicant’s spouse worked as a physical therapist in France. She is working as 
a massage therapist while she pursues validation of her credentials to work as a physical 
therapist in the United States. (Tr. 71-72.) Applicant and his spouse own no property in 
the United States. (Tr. 72.) He testified to his belief that his spouse intends to become a 
U.S. citizen when she becomes eligible. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 Although no request was made for administrative notice of facts about France, the 
following facts about that country were obtained from the U.S. State Department’s 
website.2 Relations between the United States and France are active and friendly. The 
                                                 
2 See the U.S. State Department’s Fact Sheet U.S.-France Relations, dated July 21, 2016; France Quick 
Facts, updated February 3, 2017; and Europe Travel Alert, updated May 1, 2017. The documents may be 
 
 
7 
two countries share common values and have parallel policies on most political, 
economic, and security issues. Differences have not generally been allowed to impair the 
pattern of close cooperation between the two countries.  
 
 France and the United States work closely on many issues, most notably in 
combating terrorism and stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
France is one of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) top five troop 
contributors and supports NATO modernization efforts. 
 
 Following the terrorist attacks in Paris in January 2015 and November 2015, the 
French government imposed a state of emergency that remains in effect until July 15, 
2017, which allows the government to create zones of protection and security and to 
prevent the circulation of individuals. The French government has re-established border 
controls and movement may be restricted in some areas. The U.S. Department of State 
issued a travel alert on May 1, 2017, informing U.S. citizens of the continued threat of 
terrorist attacks throughout Europe. Recent, widely reported incidents in France, Russia, 
Sweden, and the United Kingdom demonstrate that the Islamic State of Iraq and ash-
Sham (ISIS or Da’esh), al-Qa’ida, and their affiliates have the ability to plan and execute 
terrorist attacks in Europe. U.S. citizens are alerted to the possibility that terrorist 
sympathizers or self-radicalized extremists may conduct attacks with little or no warning. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
                                                 
accessed at www.state.gov. 
 
 
8 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern about foreign preference is articulated in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict 
with U.S. national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself, 
the fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
Applicant is a citizen of his native France (SOR ¶ 1.a) and of the United States 
based on his birth abroad to a U.S. citizen mother. Retention of foreign citizenship 
acquired from birth is not disqualifying in the absence of a conflict with U.S. national 
security interests (see AG ¶ 11(a), “the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. 
national security interests”) or any indicia of foreign preference (see AG ¶ 11(b), “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a foreign country, and there 
is no evidence of foreign preference”). During his OPM interview, Applicant professed no 
allegiance to one country over the other. He possessed dual passports (SOR ¶ 1.b) and 
voted in elections in both countries starting in 2005, including in the French presidential 
election in April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c). However, for the most part, his daily life was consistent 
 
 
9 
with his French citizenship before he came to the United States in August 2012. He was 
educated in France with his doctoral studies paid for by the French government through 
his work as a salaried doctoral student at a French government-funded scientific and 
technical research institute. He used his French passport in preference to his U.S. 
passport on four trips to China between November 2008 and June 2010 while he was 
working for the French research institute between September 2007 and February 2011. 
He then worked as a post-doctoral researcher at a public university in France from April 
2011 to August 2012. He earned a retirement stipend from his employment with the 
French government, although the amount is relatively minimal, and he will not begin to 
receive it until November 2049 (SOR ¶ 1.e). He benefitted from universal health coverage 
as a French resident (SOR ¶ 1.d). After moving to the United States and becoming 
employed by a U.S. defense contractor, he renewed his French passport in January 2016 
(SOR ¶ 1.f) for convenience of travel to France and other European Union countries. 
 
Under the adjudicative guidelines in effect as of the date of the issuance of the 
SOR, possession of a current foreign passport was considered an exercise of foreign 
preference.3 Possession of a current foreign passport is now potentially disqualifying 
under AG ¶ 10 in two circumstances, as follows: 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any 
country other than the United States; or 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S. 
 
 Neither disqualifying condition is established. Applicant disclosed that he held a 
French passport valid to July 2015 and that he used that passport on four trips to China. 
When asked at his October 2016 hearing about the status of his French passport, 
Applicant responded that he renewed it in January 2016. There is no evidence of any 
action taken on his part to inform his employer that he holds a valid French passport, but 
it was also not shown that he has an affirmative obligation to notify his employer. There 
is no indication that he acted to conceal his possession of a valid French passport either 
from his employer or the DOD or any evidence that he ever used his French passport to 
enter or exit the United States.   
 
 As a dual citizen raised in France, it is understandable that Applicant as a resident 
of France would actively exercise his French citizenship by holding a French passport, 
working in France, accepting educational and medical benefits from France, and voting 
in French elections. Consistent with that reality, the salient issues involving such foreign 
involvement are if they conflict with U.S. national interests, are in violation of U.S. law, or 
an individual acts to conceal his foreign involvement. In that regard, Applicant’s past 
                                                 
3 ¶ 10(a)(1) of the foreign preference guideline provided: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited 
to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.  
 
 
10 
acceptance of educational and medical benefits and the future payout of a small 
retirement benefit from his work in France, do not raise a disqualifying concern under the 
current AG ¶ 10(d), “participation in foreign activities.” The educational and medical 
benefits were accepted when he was living and working in France, and he is no longer 
entitled to those benefits. His future retirement income is minimal and expected to be 
received so far in the future that it does not concern me. Applicant has not voted in a 
French election in over four years, and he has no intention to vote in a French election in 
the future. The SOR does not allege and there is no evidence indicating that Applicant’s 
employment with either the French research institute or the French university before he 
came to the United States was in conflict with national security interests, and Applicant 
was candid about his past employment for the French government. 
 
As for any concerns of possible foreign preference that might arise from Applicant’s 
retention of dual citizenship and a French passport as a U.S. resident citizen, three 
mitigating conditions are implicated under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; and 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk. 
 
Applicant clearly places a high value on his French citizenship and wants to retain 
it. He indicated on his SF 86 that he does not wish to relinquish his French citizenship 
because of his paternal and spousal ties to France. He told an OPM investigator that he 
would prefer to not renounce his French citizenship, but that he would give it serious 
thought if it meant that he could not obtain security clearance eligibility. Subsequent 
research has led him to understand that renunciation of French citizenship is not currently 
possible for him. Even so, there is no evidence that his citizenship with France, a close 
NATO ally of the United States, is in conflict with U.S. national security interests. He is 
not required to renounce his French citizenship for security clearance eligibility. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern about foreign influence is articulated in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
 
 
11 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a French citizen with U.S. permanent residency. Applicant’s 
brother and mother have dual French-U.S. citizenship. His father and his spouse’s mother 
are French citizens. Applicant’s parents and mother-in-law live in France. Applicant also 
has contact, once a year on average, with his former Ph.D. advisors, who hold prominent 
positions with a French national research institute. One of his former advisors, French 
research scientist Y, lists on his curriculum vitae that he supervised Applicant’s doctorate 
under a research grant from October 2007 to April 2011. This researcher was posted to 
a Chinese university in September 2008, and in July 2012, he became a full-time 
researcher for the French institute at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Applicant and 
his spouse also have a security significant financial tie to France in that they have 
approximately $110,000 in French bank deposits. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or potential 
conflict of interest. 
 
Understandably, Applicant maintains close contact with his parents in France, and 
his spouse maintains close ties to her mother in France. The mere possession of close 
family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, even if only one relative lives in a foreign country, and an applicant 
has frequent, non-casual contact with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006). 
 
Application of AG ¶¶ 7(a) or 7(f) depends on whether there is substantial evidence 
of a “heightened risk” of foreign influence or exploitation because of the respective foreign 
tie, contact, or interest. The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
 
 
12 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property 
in a foreign country, but it is nonetheless a relatively low standard. The nature and 
strength of the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the 
nature of its government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated 
with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
The United States has had traditionally close ties to France. While the interests of 
even longstanding allies are not always completely aligned, it is unlikely that France would 
place Applicant in a position where he would be forced to choose between the United 
States and his or his spouse’s family members living in France. With its democratic 
institutions and respect for human rights, France does not engage in coercive tactics 
against French citizens or dual citizens living in the United States in an attempt to gather 
valuable information from the United States. Despite France’s counterterrorism efforts in 
alliance with the United States and other European countries, terrorist and other extremist 
elements have planned and executed terrorist attacks on French soil in recent years. As 
a result, the French parliament extended the state of emergency imposed in 2015, and 
the U.S. State Department is sufficiently concerned about the potential for future attacks 
to alert U.S. citizens about the risk of travel throughout Europe. The Government 
produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his and his spouse’s family 
members in France, of his relationships with these family members, and of his and his 
spouse’s bank assets to implicate AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(f). Although Applicant’s brother has 
dual citizenship with France and the United States, given his longtime residency and 
employment in the United States, it is difficult to see where Applicant’s relationship or 
contacts with his brother create a heightened risk. There also exists a risk of undue foreign 
influence under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) because of his contact and connection to his former 
advisors, one of whom is now executive director of the French research institute and the 
other is posted by the institute to a position with an entity affiliated with the Chinese 
government. 
 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a) provides: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. 
 
The country involved is France, a close ally. No evidence was presented that 
Applicant’s family members in France are politically active or are affiliated with the French 
government other than perhaps his mother, who as a public school teacher may be a 
 
 
13 
state or municipal employee. There is no evidence that his family members living in 
France currently engage in activities which would bring significant attention to them or 
that they have been targeted. They are aware that Applicant works for a government 
contractor and has applied for DOD security clearance eligibility, but there is no evidence 
that they have disclosed information about Applicant’s employment outside of the family. 
As for the risk of terrorism, in that regard a distinction must be made between countries 
that sponsor or condone terrorism against Western targets and countries like France that 
are victimized by such attacks. There is no evidence that his parents or mother-in-law are 
at higher risk than other similarly situated citizens in France who neither hold prominent 
positions nor are actively involved in the French government, intelligence, or military. AG 
¶ 8(a) applies in mitigation of the risks presented by his routine contacts, whether 
independent or through his spouse, with family members living in France. 
 
Applicant’s former employment with a French national institute was not specifically 
alleged as raising a foreign influence concern. To the extent that Applicant’s contacts with 
his former advisors could lead to a conflict of interest situation, it was not shown that 
Applicant currently has a sense of loyalty or obligation to them. He has limited contact 
with them, once a year by email, in response to their inquiries about his research and 
other activities. Applicant’s contacts are professional and courteous. AGs ¶ 8(b) and ¶ 
8(c) apply in mitigation of his contacts to French researchers X and Y: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to Applicant’s contacts with his parents and, albeit primarily 
through his spouse, to his mother-in-law. They cannot reasonably be considered as 
casual or infrequent. He contacts his parents weekly. His spouse calls her mother weekly 
as well, and Applicant speaks to his mother-in-law monthly. 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, 
or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” Applicant admitted 
in November 2014 that his and his spouse’s foreign financial assets, then valued 
$135,000, were important to them. At his hearing, he clarified that of the $110,000 
currently on deposit, less than $10,000 belongs to him, and that his spouse controls the 
rest pursuant to a prenuptial agreement. By virtue of their marriage contract, it may 
reasonably be inferred that those assets are not considered so routine or of such little 
value to his spouse. At the same time, Applicant has his employment income in the United 
 
 
14 
States. He is not likely to jeopardize his income and career by succumbing to any undue 
influence or pressure. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In evaluating the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4 The analyses under Guidelines B and C are incorporated 
in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States for the past four years. He 
spent most of his formative years in France, although the choice to raise him in France 
was made by his parents. Applicant and his spouse came to the United States in August 
2012 for his position as an adjunct professor at a private university. When his contract 
was ending, he looked for employment in both the United States and France. He declined 
a job offer in France to work for his current employer because of the prospect of 
challenging research. He sponsored his spouse for U.S. permanent residency, and she 
intends to apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible. Applicant expressed his intention 
to remain in the United States. He testified that he understands his reporting 
responsibilities and would comply if approached by an unauthorized person for sensitive 
or classified access. While the Government need not wait to see what he would do in 
such a situation, and, as acknowledged by the Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-10025 
(App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices 
that could be important to a loved-one, such as a family member,” Applicant has not acted 
to conceal any of his foreign contacts or activities from the DOD. For the reasons noted, 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance 
eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
  
                                                 
4 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
15 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
