 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08409 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These AGs 
apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Any changes 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
resulting from the issuance of new Adjudicative Guidelines did not affect my decision in 
this case. 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On May 24, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated July 1, 2016, was provided to him by letter that same day. 
Applicant received the FORM on July 15, 2016. He was afforded a period of 30 days to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did 
not submit any additional information within the 30-day period. On June 2, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations.  His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old security guard employed by a defense contractor since 
April 2004, and he seeks to renew his security clearance.   
 
The FORM contains no information about Applicant’s educational background. 
He was married from 1987 to 1995, and that marriage ended by divorce. Applicant has 
two adult children.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 19 delinquent accounts totaling about $24,636. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a – l.s; Item 1) These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions; his 
October 6, 2014 SF-86; and his October 29, 2015 and October 15, 2014 credit reports. 
(Items 2 – 5) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to supporting his son while he was 
attending college. In his October 2014 SF-86, Applicant stated that he had consolidated 
his debts with a debt-consolidation company, however, it appears that he did not 
maintain that plan as he recently signed up with a new debt-consolidation company in 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
May 2016. (Items 2, 3) The record does not contain any documentation that Applicant 
made any actual payments on his delinquencies.  
 
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR 
accounts. He did not describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record 
lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the 
causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted 
that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his 
suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish 
mitigation, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
