KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the Decision devoted unreasonable attention to the one
remaining tax lien at the expense of all the positive aspects of his record. We conclude that
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-08885.a1
DATE: 06/21/2017
DATE: June 21, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-08885
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 26, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 20, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge David M. White denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2008.  He is seeking to renew
a clearance that he has held since 2005.  Applicant’s SOR included four Federal or state tax liens
that resulted from a series of job-related relocations.  The Judge resolved them in Applicant’s favor. 
However, one additional allegation pertained to a state tax lien for a little over $17,000, and the
Judge found that it had not been resolved.  Applicant claimed that he did not owe the claimed tax
liability because he was working out of state during the time covered by the lien, tax years 1998
through 2004.  The Judge found that he had not corroborated the basis for this dispute.  He found
that Applicant’s CPA had advised him to settle with the state because he had admitted that he had
lived there during at least some of the years in question.  The Judge noted a 2005 credit report,
(admitted as Item 3), which listed addresses going back to 2001.  These addresses were all in the
state that had filed the lien.  The Judge also stated that Applicant had provided no evidence other
than uncorroborated assertions regarding his current financial stability and ability to repay his debt. 
“All record evidence indicates that he is unwilling to do so in any event.”  Decision at 3.
The Judge’s Analysis
Though noting the liens that Applicant did resolve, the Judge concluded that he had not
mitigated the $17,000 state tax lien.  He cited to evidence that Applicant’s CPA had recommended
settling with the state and observed that Applicant had not provided documentary evidence in
support of his claim to have been residing elsewhere.  He stated that Applicant’s “recent and
continuing refusal to pay his apparently legitimate and substantial state income tax debt
demonstrates an absence of rehabilitation or behavioral change.”  Decision at 6.  He concluded that
it is likely that similar problems will recur and with them the potential for pressure, coercion, or
duress.
Discussion
Applicant cites to his dispute of the tax debt in question, his having resolved other debts, his
good security record, and other favorable evidence.  He argues that the Decision devoted
unreasonable attention to the one remaining tax lien at the expense of all the positive aspects of his
record.  After considering this argument in light of the record as a whole, we conclude that 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017).  
Applicant argues that the Judge’s overall decision was based upon “limited information.” 
Appeal Brief at 2. He states that information regarding his ability to pay his debts is available
through his Federal income tax filings but no one requested evidence of financial stability.  In a
DOHA proceeding it is the applicant’s duty to present evidence in mitigation of the concerns raised
in his SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  It is neither the Judge’s nor Department Counsel’s duty to seek
additional mitigating evidence or otherwise undertake further investigation of the concerns raised
in an SOR.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03062 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11,  2015).  Although pro se
applicant’s are not held to the standards of attorneys, they are expected to take reasonable steps to
protect their rights.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  In the case
before us, any paucity of mitigating evidence in the file was due to Applicant’s own decisions after
having received adequate notice of his evidentiary responsibilities.1    
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate
the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified
information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case 14-06808 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016).  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.       
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
1To the extent that Applicant is challenging the Judge’s findings about the state tax lien, we conclude that the
findings are supported by substantial evidence.  See ISCR Case No. 14-04435 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017). 

