  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-01137 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain and upgrade his security clearance which is 
required for his employment with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. 
DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated August 26, 2015, detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. The security concern 
allegation was a bankruptcy that Applicant filed in July 2014 (SOR 1.a). On March 6, 
2017, DOD amended the SOR alleging that the bankruptcy was discharged in August 
2015, and adding nine allegations of delinquent debt (SOR 1.b – 1.j). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
  2 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on March 6, 2017. He admitted 
allegation 1.a concerning the bankruptcy but denied the nine allegations of delinquent 
debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed with the original SOR allegation on 
June 30, 2016. The original case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. DOD issued 
a notice of hearing on February 13, 2017, for a hearing on March 8, 2017. The hearing 
was rescheduled for March 13, 2017. I convened the hearing for the SOR allegations as 
rescheduled. The Government offered seven exhibits that I marked and admitted into 
the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 to 7. Applicant and one 
witness testified. Applicant submitted six exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through F. I kept the record open 
for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted five additional 
documents that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as AX G to K. 
Department Counsel had no objection to consideration of the additional documents. (GX 
8. Memorandum dated April 24, 2017) I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
March 20, 2017. The record closed on April 24, 2017, when I received Applicant’s 
additional documents. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 34 years old. He was born in the Dominican 
Republic, and entered the United States in 1996. He became a United States citizen in 
April 2006. He served on active duty in the Army from July 1997 until February 1999 
when he received a general discharge because of a family hardship. He married a 
Dominican Republic native in March 1996. She is now a United States citizen. He has 
four children, three sons and a daughter. All of his children either live at home or are 
college students being supported by Applicant and his wife. Applicant received an 
associate’s degree in 1996. He has taken additional continuing education or certification 
courses. (Tr. 27-29; GX 1, e-QIP, dated November 7, 2012) 
 
Applicant has been employed fulltime as a data loss prevention analyst for a 
contractor with defense related contracts since February 2012. His current yearly salary 
is $91,000. Prior to that position, he worked in security for another DOD contractor from 
2008 until 2012. He has been employed fulltime since 2008. He received eligibility for 
access to classified information in 2008 while working with his employer for another 
government agency. His present yearly income is $91,000. His net monthly pay is 
$5,200. His wife is employed part time, and she contributes approximately $1,000 
monthly to the family income, for a total family income of $6,200. Their monthly 
expenses are approximately $5,400, leaving $800 monthly in discretionary funds. 
Applicant applied for and has been offered part time employment to boost his 
discretionary income. The position requires Applicant to have a higher level of eligibility 
for access to classified information. (Tr. 21-25, 39-52; AX F, e-mail, dated March 22, 
2016) 
  3 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant filed for a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on October 4, 
2013. Additional bankruptcy petitions were filed in April and July 2014. (SOR 1.a) The 
amended SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 5, dated May 26, 2016; GX 6, dated 
March 6, 2017) confirm the following delinquent debt for Applicant; an automobile loan 
for $24,995 (SOR 1.b); student loans past due more than 180 days in the approximate 
amount of $107 on a balance of $1,812 (SOR 1.c); past due more than $104 on a 
balance of $1,622 (SOR 1.d); past due more than $155 on a balance of $2,806 (SOR 
1.e); past due more than $200 on a balance of $2,300 (SOR 1.f); past due more than 
$198 on a balance of $2,280 (SOR 1.g); past due more than $127 on a balance of 
$1,541 (SOR 1.h); past due more than $128 on a balance of $1,542 (SOR 1.i); and a 
telecommunication debt in collection for $1,051 (SOR 1.j). The total amount of the debt 
is $40,000 of which $23,000 is delinquent debt.  
Applicant’s wife lost her job in December 2011. Prior to losing her job, her yearly 
salary was approximately $120,000. She just recently gained part time employment. 
The loss of her income had an adverse effect on the family finances. At the time, she 
was the primary income producer for the large family. After losing her income, Applicant 
and his wife contacted their bank seeking a loan modification for their mortgage. Instead 
of the loan modification, the bank foreclosed on the house. To prevent the foreclosure, 
Applicant filed a bankruptcy petition. After having problems completing the required 
bankruptcy documents, Applicant contacted an attorney who assisted them in filing the 
bankruptcy petition. The attorney testified that after a few false starts, the bankruptcy 
was correctly filed in October 2014. (GX 2, Bankruptcy Documents) Applicant’s debts 
were discharged in August 2015. His student loans were not discharged as normal in 
the bankruptcy proceedings. (Tr. 19-21, 25-64-67, AX A, Bankruptcy Discharge, dated 
April 16, 2015; AX I, Statement, dated March 28, 2017) 
Applicant testified that he became the only income producer in the family in 2011. 
He and his family moved to a house that was not as expensive after his wife lost her job 
in 2011. Their monthly mortgage payment was reduced from $2,600 to $1,750.  
 Applicant testified that he stopped payment on the car loan (SOR 1.b) in April 
2016. In the last year, he only made a $300 car loan payment in December 2016. The 
creditor offered to have Applicant bring the loan current for a $5,000 payment. Applicant 
would like to pay the past due amount and then refinance the loan. He is anticipating a 
tax refund and he will use the refund to bring the loan current. In January 2017, he 
requested that his student loans (SOR 1.c – 1.i) be placed in forbearance. His student 
loans were deferred until April 2017. After April 1, 2017, he has an arrangement with the 
student loan creditor to pay $200 monthly on the student loans. Applicant also testified 
that he made an arrangement with the telecommunication company for the debt at SOR 
1.j and is paying $51 each month. Applicant could not provide documentation to verify 
his arrangements with any of his creditors since all of the arrangements with the 
creditors were verbal. Applicant provided a copy of his family budget. (Tr. 20-23, 29-38; 
AX K)  
Applicant provided a statement at the hearing concerning an arrangement to pay 
his car loan. The outstanding balance on the loan was $24,995 with $5,699 past due. 
  4 
 
His monthly payments are $659. He stated that he and the creditor agreed that 
Applicant would pay off the past due amount within three months. There would be no 
repossession, and the normal monthly payments would continue. (AX B, statement, 
undated) Applicant provided no document from the creditor to verify this arrangement.  
After the hearing, Applicant provided an offer from the creditor to settle the debt 
for $15,000. Applicant was to pay the settlement by April 18, 2017. Applicant did not 
provide any evidence of a settlement payment. Applicant provided an additional 
statement that he and the creditor agreed that he would return the vehicle to the creditor 
and pay the remainder of $9,000 within 18 months starting on May 21, 2017. Applicant 
did not provide a statement from the creditor verifying the agreement or a receipt for the 
required May 21, 2017 payment. (AX G, Applicant’s Statement, dated April 20, 2017; 
AX H. Settlement Offer, dated April 17, 2017) 
Applicant noted at the hearing that he was unable to make payments on the 
student loans starting in April 2016. In January 2017, he requested a forbearance of the 
student loans for hardship reasons. The student loan payments were deferred for three 
months until April 2017. He would then make monthly $200 payments. (Tr. 36-37; AX E, 
Letter, dated February 20, 2017) In his post hearing submission, Applicant stated that 
his student loans were in good standing. (AX G, Statement dated April 20, 2017) 
However, the statement he provide from federal student loan servicing shows that the 
last student loan payment was received on November 11, 2010, and there were past 
due balances and interest. A payment was due on April 15, 2017. Applicant did not 
provide evidence of payment on the student loans. (AX J, Monthly Bill, dated March 25, 
2017)  
Applicant agrees he has a telecommunication debt of approximately $1,000 
(SOR 1.j). He submitted a document showing that he made a $55.15 payment on the 
debt on March 10, 2017. His bank statement reflects the payment. As part of the 
agreement, Applicant was to continue to pay $100 monthly to satisfy the debt. (Tr. 37-
38) In his post hearing submission, Applicant noted that the debt was sold to a 
collection agency which offered to settle the debt for $450. Applicant stated the payment 
was to be deducted from his bank account on April 28 settlement agreement or a 
receipt for the payment. (AX G, Statement, dated April 20, 2017)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
  5 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
  6 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant filed a bankruptcy petition in 2014 
and his debts were discharged in 2015. Student loans were not discharged. He 
experienced additional delinquent debt after the discharge. Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debts is documented in his credit reports and in his admissions. The 
information raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial 
obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the 
Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts raise the following security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, 
recent, and not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. He sought a 
car loan that went delinquent and had a delinquent telecommunication debt after a 
  7 
 
bankruptcy discharge. The financing of education using student loans that remained 
from the bankruptcy discharge is not an unusual circumstance or beyond his control.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. Applicant’s wife losing her job was 
a circumstance beyond his control. However, Applicant was fully employed from 2008 at 
a good salary. Applicant tried to lower his expenses by moving to a less costly rental. 
He filed a bankruptcy petition in 2014. He used bankruptcy as a legal and permissible 
means of resolving debt. His debts were discharged in 2015 except for student loans. 
He accumulated additional debt after the discharge that became delinquent. Applicant 
failed to present sufficient documentation that he acted reasonably and responsibly to 
resolve his debts.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant received financial 
counseling as a condition of filing bankruptcy. However, he has unresolved delinquent 
debt so his financial situation is not under control. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must evidence a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant 
must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of 
debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of 
debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for 
a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner.  
 
Applicant claims he is now paying his student loans and has payment plans for 
his car loan and telecommunication debt. However, he presented no credible 
documentation to establish that these are agreed plans by the creditors and that 
payments under the plan are being made. His promise to make payments in the future 
is not a substitute for a meaningful track record of debt payment. He has not established 
a sufficient track record of paying his debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially 
responsible manner. His lack of responsible financial conduct is likely to continue. There 
is evidence of a lack of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliable conduct and 
actions by Applicant towards his finances. In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that 
Applicant made arrangements to pay, settle, compromise, dispute, or otherwise resolve 
any of the delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documents and detailed explanations of the mitigating information.  
 
Applicant has not met his burden to establish that he acted with reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his financial 
obligations. With evidence of delinquent debt and insufficient documentation to support 
responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial 
  8 
 
problems are not under control, and that Applicant is not managing his personal 
financial obligations reasonably and responsibly. His financial problems are not behind 
him. Applicant’s failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an 
indication that he may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant served 
two years on active duty in the Army. Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he lost 
the ability to count on his wife’s income. While he used a legal and permissible means 
of resolving some of his debts, he accumulated more delinquent debt after the 
bankruptcy. He has not established an adequate plan to resolve his remaining 
delinquent debts. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to establish that he 
acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances under the circumstances. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  9 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.j  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
