KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-02050.a1
DATE: 06/12/2017
DATE: June 12, 2017
In Re:
---------------- 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02050
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 21, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 24, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Single with two children, Applicant has worked for her present employer for about a year. 
She makes around $1,500 every two weeks, which is a significant reduction from the $3,000 she
earned each pay period up until 2009, when she lost her job.  She was out of work for about nine
months, but her subsequent employment entailed significant fluctuations in her pay rate.  Because
of these circumstances, Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties.
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts.  For example, she has several judgments against
her resulting from evictions from two apartment complexes, a vehicle repossession, and numerous
collection accounts for telecommunication services, medical expenses, etc.  The Judge found that
Applicant had not provided evidence of debt resolution.  He stated that Applicant had failed to
present documentary evidence in support of her dispute of certain debts or her claim to have
attempted to resolve her financial problems. 
Discussion
Applicant reiterates her testimony about her effort at debt resolution.  She also discusses
matters that she believes provides context for her financial difficulties, such as her status as a single
mother, her unemployment, and her claim that she did not owe certain debts alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  Neither has she shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017). 
Applicant states that her brief contains additional information concerning her financial condition. 
However, we cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.   
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, principally that Applicant had not corroborated her testimony with documentary evidence.1 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
1“The record was held open through September 6, 2016, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit
documentation . . . With no additional materials submitted, the record was closed[.]”  Decision at 2.  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
