 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-03900 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 15, 2014. On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 12, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on June 6, 2016. On June 7, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant (including documents identified as Items 1 through 5), 
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
 
2 
 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on July 8, 2016, and did 
not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 51 years old, and has at least one child.3 He and his wife of almost 
nine years divorced in 2009. He honorably served as an active reservist in the Army 
National Guard from 1983 through 1988. He received a bachelor of arts degree in 1992. 
  
He has been employed full time by his current employer since July 2014.  He 
was unemployed from April 2011 through January 2012 following a layoff from his 
employer of eight years. During an unspecified period, Applicant received 
unemployment compensation.4  
 
Applicant admits to the six alleged debts totaling $32,778, which are also 
corroborated by credit reports.5 His debts include four judgments, totaling $28,569, 
granted in 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d) and two accounts, 
totaling $4,209, placed for collection in 2011 and 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). In his SOR 
answer, Applicant attributes these debts to unemployment, divorce, and obligations for 
child support and alimony.  
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant averred that his wages are being garnished to 
satisfy his child-support obligation, the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and a judgment 
in favor of the same creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.6 He also claimed that the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c relate to the same debt, as do the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.e. Not only did Applicant not provide any corroborating documentation, but 
the credit reports do not contain sufficient information to support these claims.7 
 
                                                          
2 I extracted these facts from Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 1) and the e-QIP (Item 2), unless 
otherwise indicated by citation to another item in the record.  
 
3 Although Applicant did not report any children on his e-QIP, he references a child-support obligation 
therein and in his SOR answer. 
  
4 The record does not address this issue directly, but in his SOR answer, Applicant references having 
money from unemployment. 
 
5 Items 4 and 5. 
 
6 Although the creditors are the same, there are no facts in the record to prove that this judgment is for 
the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Therefore, I consider it an additional debt not alleged in the SOR 
and will consider it for purposes of mitigation only. 
 
7 Items 4 and 5. I considered that the creditor who sold the debt to the collection agency alleged in SOR 
1.b is different from the creditor alleged in SOR 1.c. I also considered that the same creditor to whom the 
judgment was granted in SOR ¶ 1.b charged off an account in an amount that is only $10 off from the 
high credit noted by the collection agency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant accrued child-support arrearages of approximately $10,000 when he 
lost his job in 2011. He is now current with his child-support obligation, and has satisfied 
his alimony obligation. The amounts of his current child-support and previous alimony 
obligations were not disclosed in the record.  
 
Applicant intends to address his delinquent debts when his “pressing issues” are 
resolved. In addition, he claims that he is “beginning to get back on [his] feet” and 
should “soon” be able to address his debt. However, Applicant does not provide any 
specific details about his income history or “pressing issues,” or any specifics 
concerning the financial impact that his layoff, divorce, support obligations, or other past 
or present circumstances have had on his ability to pay his delinquent debt.  
 
The record contains no evidence that Applicant has either sought or received any 
credit counseling. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that he failed to 
provide any documentary evidence to support the assertions outlined in his answer to 
the SOR. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.8  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG.9 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government establishes a 
disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.10 The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
                                                          
8 Directive, § 3.2.  
 
9 Directive, Enclosure 2.  
 
10 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. 
 
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit bureau reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
5 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s unemployment and divorce were 
circumstances beyond his control, he failed to meet his burden to show that he acted 
responsibly in light of those circumstances to resolve his delinquent debts.   
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant has not received any 
financial counseling and his debts remain unresolved. Accordingly, his financial 
problems are not under control. Although Applicant is credited with resolving his child-
support arrearage, a non-SOR debt, it does not suffice to support a good-faith effort to 
resolve the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant has not provided any 
documentation to show that any of his debts are being resolved through garnishment or 
otherwise. Moreover, resolution of debt via garnishment would not constitute good-faith 
effort. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
