 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )       ISCR Case: 15-02634  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 30, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $50,000 in delinquent taxes that he has not repaid. 
He also did not file a Federal tax return for one year, or state tax returns for seven years. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 27, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On December 13, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 23, 2016,1 and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Answer.) 
On March 1, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items,2 was 
mailed to Applicant on March 1, 2016, and received by him on March 8, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection 
to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period 
he was afforded.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions3 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. His marriage was annulled. He has held his present 
employment with a defense contractor since 2014. Applicant received a bachelor’s 
degree in 2013. He served in the U.S. Navy from 2000 to 2004, and was honorably 
discharged. (Item 3.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
                                                 
1 The answer is dated January 23, 2015, but that appears to be in error. 
2 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on November 24, 2014. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
3 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted allegations 1.a and 1.f without 
reservation. He admitted in part, and denied in part, allegation 1.e. Those admissions are 
findings of fact. He denied allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. (Item 2.) Subparagraphs 1.e and 
1.f regard unfiled tax returns. The debts set forth in allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are 
documented in one or more of the three credit bureau reports in the record dated July 4, 
2014; March 5, 2015; and October 1, 2015. (Items 7, 6, and 5.) The status of the debts 
and tax returns is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) at least 
$52,597 in unpaid back taxes. This debt is for tax years 2006, 2008, and 2009. A tax lien 
was filed against Applicant in 2011 concerning this debt. Applicant was a contractor in 
Iraq during those periods and did not save enough money to pay his taxes from those 
years. He states in his Answer that he had a payment agreement with the IRS until 
November 2015, which was in the process of being reexamined. No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denied owing $70 for a past-due medical debt. He stated in his 
Answer, “I do not remember owing anyone this amount and I have tried to contact [the 
creditor] with no luck. I found that they are closed and can’t get ahold of anyone. I’ve not 
been contacted by anyone for this amount and do not know what this would be for.” 
 
 This debt is reflected in the July 4, 2014 credit report. (Government Exhibit 7.) It 
does not appear on the two most recent credit reports. (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.) 
Based on the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven that this is a 
currently existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
  
 1.c. Applicant denied owing $175 for a past-due medical debt. He stated in his 
Answer, “I did owe this money and after I started at [his current employer], I downloaded 
‘Credit Karma’ and found 2 places I was in collections for. I called them immediately and 
paid them in full. This debt was paid in October 2014.” Applicant also supplied the 
transaction number.  
 
 This debt is reflected in the July 4, 2014 credit report. (Government Exhibit 7.) It 
does not appear on the two most recent credit reports. (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.) 
Based on the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven that this is a 
currently existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied owing $366 for past-due court fees. He stated in his Answer, 
“I did owe this money and after I started at [his current employer], I downloaded ‘Credit 
Karma’ and found 2 places I was in collections for. I called them immediately and paid 
them in full. This debt was paid in October 2014.” Applicant also supplied the transaction 
number.  
 
 This debt is reflected in the July 4, 2014 credit report. (Government Exhibit 7.) It 
does not appear on the two most recent credit reports. (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Based on the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven that this is a 
currently existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. This subparagraph alleges that Applicant did not file state tax returns for the 
years 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. He admitted not filing tax returns 
for tax years 2006, 2008, and 2009. He stated in his Answer that the state tax authority 
prepared substitute tax returns for him for those three years, and that he had paid off any 
back taxes in full. He further stated that for tax years 2010 through 2013 he was a full-
time student and did not make enough money to be required to file tax returns. However, 
Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence to support his statements, such as 
copies of tax returns, applicable state laws, or any financial statements. This allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted that it appears he did not file a Federal tax return for tax 
year 2006. He stated in his Answer that a paid preparer had done his tax return and that 
he remembers sending them in to the IRS. He further stated that he would address this 
issue in the near future. No further information was provided. This allegation is found 
against Applicant. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has been continuously employed since 2014. His tax issues have been 
in existence since at least 2006. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant continues to owe the tax debt alleged in the SOR. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not recur. Mitigation was not 
established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that his tax problems were caused by his not saving enough 
money to pay his taxes while working overseas. This situation appears to have been 
voluntary on his part, and therefore not sufficient for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Accordingly, 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Finally, Applicant did not supply any documentation to show that he has filed his 
missing tax returns, that he did not have to file said returns, or that he entered into a 
payment arrangement with the IRS, and is in compliance with such an arrangement. AG 
¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate his tax issues. Guideline F is found against 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in 
the U.S. Navy for four years, and has worked as a contractor in Iraq. Applicant is a mature 
adult, who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $50,000 in back 
taxes. He also failed to show either that he has filed all of his tax returns, or that he was 
statutorily exempt from filing such returns. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or 
duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
