 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-04804  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file required Federal income returns, or pay various taxes, 
between 2008 and 2014. His residence with a person he knew to be engaged in 
criminal activity, false answers on his clearance application, and pattern of traffic-related 
offenses indicate poor judgment and untrustworthiness. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On March 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct),1 and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
                                                 
1 The drafter of the SOR inadvertently included two allegations identified as ¶ 2.g. This typographical error 
was corrected by Department Counsel by designating the second of those allegations ¶ 2.h after having 
received and reviewed Applicants answer to the SOR. Applicant admitted both allegations were true. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
May 13, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on May 16, 2016, and received by him on May 20, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30-day period, did not object to 
its contents, and did not request additional time to submit a response. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on March 20, 2017. Items 1 through 3 are admitted into evidence. Item 4 
is an unsworn and unauthenticated summary of Applicant’s October 2014 interview 
prepared by an investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). It is 
admitted for the limited purposes of correcting erroneous SF-86 biographical information 
about Applicant, and evaluation of any mitigating evidence that is not cumulative with 
other record evidence. Directive ¶ E3.1.20 prohibits its admission into evidence against 
Applicant’s interests in the absence of an authenticating witness. Item 5 is a request for 
administrative notice of certain facts about Thailand. It is included in the record, and I 
take administrative notice of the facts set forth on pages 3 and 4 thereof.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines (effective 
September 1, 2006), as well as the new AG (effective June 8, 2017), in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued pursuant to, and cites, the 
new AG, but my decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He has never married and has no children. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree in 1998, and has worked as a systems engineer for a defense 
contractor since August 2011. He has no prior Federal employment or military service, 
but held a security clearance during his employment with a different defense contractor 
from 2003 to 2008. (Item 3; Item 4.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, 
2.b, 2.f through 2.h, and 3.1.2 He admitted the remaining allegations in part, with 
explanations for his partial denials as described below. Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated into the following findings. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 
2013, as required by law. He admitted that he has not yet filed any of those tax returns, 
or paid his resulting delinquent tax debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). On his 
2014 SF-86, he estimated that about $125,000 in back taxes were involved over those 
six years. He offered no exculpatory explanation for having failed to meet these income 
tax obligations, saying that he “just never did.” (Item 2; Item 3 at § 26.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to timely pay various county, city, and school 
district property taxes that came due between 2012 and 2014. He claimed, in his 
answer to the SOR, that all of those delinquent local taxes were paid in January and 
February 2016. However, he did not provide documentation to substantiate having 
made those payments or the current status of those accounts. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant voluntarily left his employment with a defense contractor in August 
2008 because he was tired of the uninteresting work. He was then unemployed, or 
earned minimal incidental income, during his voluntary temporary retirement that ended 
in August 2011 when he accepted an offer to join his current employer. (Item 3.)       
 
 For a number of years, Applicant has been in a close and continuing relationship 
with a person who is a citizen of Thailand. (Item 2.) This person has been a permanent 
resident of the United States since 2003. (Item 4.) In 2011 this person was living with 
Applicant, and he was aware that she was engaged in criminal activity. She was 
arrested, convicted, and sentenced to probation for state law violations in 2012. She 
was subsequently arrested and charged with a Federal felony in 2013. In October 2014 
she was convicted of the Federal felony, and sentenced to time served while awaiting 
trial and supervised probation. After her releases from state and Federal custody, she 
resumed living with Applicant, where she still resides without paying rent. While she was 
in Federal prison, Applicant provided her between $3,000 and $4,000 in financial 
support. He has also purchased a car for her use, for which she pays him $200 per 
month. He denied providing her “complete financial support,” as alleged in the SOR, 
and said that she pays her own personal expenses such as food. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant did not disclose this relationship with a foreign national on his 2014 SF-
86. He claimed that he truthfully answered, “No,” in response to the Section 19 question 
about foreign contacts, although he admittedly has a close and continuing relationship 
with the foreign person, because he denies that they are “bound by affection, influence, 
common interests, and/or obligation,” as the question inquires.  He acknowledged that 
                                                 
2 SOR ¶ 3.1 is another apparent typographical error by the drafter of the SOR. It should be ¶ 3.a, but was 
not corrected before the case was submitted for decision and the error creates no confusion so I will not 
change the erroneous designation. 
 
 
4 
 
 
his, “No” answer to the question in section 20A that asked if he had ever provided 
financial support for any foreign national was incorrect, but denied that it was deliberate. 
(Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant admitted to committing various traffic-related offenses in March 2012, 
July 2011, and June 2007, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.f through 2.h. These included 
speeding, insurance and licensing violations, and an arrest warrant issued for failure to 
appear in relation to the 2011 offenses. (Item 1; Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, the quality of his 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I 
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
 The facts that the Government submitted about Thailand, of which I took 
administrative notice, are incorporated by reference. They have no apparent connection 
to the Thai citizen with whom Applicant resides; and do not establish any heightened 
risk of terrorism, espionage, or targeting of U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. 
Nothing in this record indicates that the Thai citizen involved in this case has had any 
connection to any person or organization in Thailand since she became a permanent 
U.S. resident in 2003.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
 
 
5 
 
 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 
2013 as required, and his resulting tax debt to the IRS remains unpaid. He also 
admitted that he failed to pay various county, city, and school district property taxes in a 
timely fashion. These facts establish security concerns under the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial irresponsibility: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant asserted that he paid his delinquent local property taxes in early 2016, 
but provided no evidence to corroborate this claim despite being offered an additional 
30 days after his receipt of the FORM to do so. Resulting mitigation of this history of not 
meeting those financial obligations is minimal. He offered no evidence of financial 
 
 
7 
 
 
counseling or other efforts to resolve his ongoing Federal income tax issues, which 
began in 2008. None of these financial issues arose from conditions that were beyond 
Applicant’s control. The record does not establish substantial mitigation of financial 
security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) or 20(g). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
Applicant is an educated and experienced individual who has previously applied 
for and been granted a security clearance. He admitted that his denial of providing 
financial support for the Thai woman while she either lived with him or was in prison was 
false, but denied that this falsification was deliberate. He claimed that his denial of close 
and continuing contact with the same woman, who had lived with him rent-free for 
years, and continues to do so, was accurate because they were not bound by affection, 
influence, common interests, and/or obligation. Without further explanation, neither of 
these assertions is credible. In combination, Applicant’s two certified, “No” answers, 
 
 
8 
 
 
which were affirmative denials rather than simple omissions concerning these facts, are 
compelling evidence of his deliberate omission, concealment, and falsification of 
relevant facts on his 2014 SF-86. The evidence establishes significant security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) as to these allegations. 
 
Applicant admitted that he knew as early as 2011 that the woman who was living 
with him was engaged in criminal activity. That knowledge was confirmed by her 2012 
local and 2014 Federal convictions for related crimes. He admitted that she 
nevertheless continues to live in close and continuing contact with him. Applicant also 
committed a series of offenses involving failure to comply with various driving laws and 
regulation between 2007 and 2012. This evidence establishes substantial security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3) and 16(g).  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions.  
   
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
 
9 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant admitted that he resides with a citizen of Thailand. That woman has 
been a lawful permanent U.S. resident since 2003. The Government presented no 
evidence suggesting that a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion might arise from Applicant’s ongoing contact or 
living arrangement with her. Nor was any potential for conflict of interest demonstrated 
given the total absence of any indication that she has had contact with anyone with Thai 
connections in the past 14 years. No security concerns under any Foreign Influence 
disqualifying conditions were raised by the evidence in this case, so discussion of 
mitigating conditions is unnecessary.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
10 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who has established a history of disregard for multiple obligations to comply with tax or 
traffic laws and regulations over the past nine years. He continues living with and 
providing financial support to a convicted Federal felon, of whose criminal activity he 
was aware. He demonstrated no progress toward resolution of substantial Federal 
income tax delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.1:    For Applicant     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. National security eligibility 
is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
