 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07050 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
____________________ 
 
Remand Decision 
____________________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Available information, including information considered on remand, is not 
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about Applicant’s unresolved delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On October 18, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for 
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a 
security clearance.1 
 
 On March 9, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2016, and I convened a hearing 
in this matter on November 15, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department 
Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified in his own behalf 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. One witness also testified for Applicant. The record closed on November 15, 
2016. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on November 22, 2016. 
 
 On January 31, 2017, Applicant submitted additional information and asked that I 
consider it in making my decision. In response to my inquiry, Department Counsel 
waived objection to Applicant’s information and I agreed to consider Applicant’s post-
hearing submissions. 
 
 On March 17, 2017, I issued a decision in which I concluded that it was not 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified 
information. Through an inadvertent oversight, I did not review and consider Applicant’s 
post-hearing submissions in reaching my initial decision. Applicant subsequently 
retained counsel and appealed, correctly claiming I had not identified Applicant’s post-
hearing submissions in my decision and that I had not provided them in the case file 
along with the information presented at hearing. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions 
are identified and marked as follows: 
 
- Ax. D: a single-page statement by Applicant, dated January 31, 2017, in which 
he provides new testimony about one of the debts at issue in the SOR and about 
his loss of employment in 2011; 
 
- Ax. E: an excerpt from the summary of his December 6, 2012 subject 
interview;  
 
- Ax. F: an April 7, 2005 letter of appreciation from a general officer to Applicant 
regarding Applicant’s performance in support of the general’s organization; 
 
- Ax. G: a December 12, 2002 letter of commendation to Applicant from a senior 
military officer; and  
 
- Ax. H: an undated Employee of the Year Award for Applicant. 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 My findings of fact in the original decision are incorporated herein by reference 
and remain unchanged by the information in Ax. D – H. The only proffer of note is 
Applicant’s claim in Ax. D regarding the information about his 2011 loss of employment 
highlighted in Ax. E. I do not accept Appellant’s characterization that Ax. E is conclusive 
of that issue because the “matter was later investigated by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM).” The highlighted text is simply the investigator’s recordation of 
what Appellant had to say about the matter during his interview, not the result of an 
OPM investigation into his job termination. 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,2 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are:  
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  
 
                                                 
2 See Directive. 6.3. 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one 
who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the 
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines (AG) originally applied in this case were implemented 
by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the AG 
were amended and reissued to be effective for all decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
On remand, I have considered and applied the new AG regarding. Nothing therein 
warrants a different decision. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s new information consisting of commendatory letters from more 
than ten years ago is not sufficient to overcome the adverse financial information in this 
case. On remand, I still conclude that Applicant’s failure to timely address his financial 
obligations despite having the means to do so underscores the doubts about his 
suitability for access to classified information that have been raised by the 
Government’s information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal 
focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
                                                 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
