1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-07564 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
06/15/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent  to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns stemming from his ties to the country of India during the 
security clearance process. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on June 16, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On July 8, 2016, after reviewing the application and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
2 
 
in a civil court action. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline, B, Foreign Influence. Applicant answered the SOR on 
August 24, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me December 2, 2016. A notice of hearing was issued on March 21, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for May 9, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted two exhibits, which were 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-B, and admitted into the record without objection. 
The transcript was received on May 17, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings, 
testimony and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
regarding the Republic of India. Applicant did not object and the memorandum of 
administrative notice and source documents were entered into the record as Government 
Exhibit 3.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 2.b-h. Those admissions  
are incorporated in my findings of fact. Applicant denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, as 
discussed below. 
 
Applicant  is 45 years old and has an undergraduate degree in engineering. He 
was born in India, came to the United States in 1999, and was naturalized in 2009. His 
spouse was a citizen of India, until her naturalization in 2016. (AX B) They have two 
daughters who are United States citizens. Applicant  has renounced his Indian citizenship. 
(AX A) He does not possess an Overseas Identification Card (OIC) card from India. (Tr. 
46) Since March 2015, he has been employed by a defense contractor. However, he has 
been working as a consultant in the field for many years. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant  has a son (20 years of age) from a previous marriage who is a citizen 
and resident of India. He has no contact with the son. Applicant left the first marriage 
when his son was two years old. (GX 2) His last face-to-face contact with his estranged 
son was in 1999. Applicant spoke to his son on the phone in 2012 to congratulate him on 
his graduation. The divorce was acrimonious and his son does not wish to have a 
relationship with him. Applicant understands that this is very sad, but the situation will not 
change. Applicant believes his first wife has remarried and he does not have any contact 
with her. (GX 1) She had sole custody of Applicant’s son. Applicant paid a one-time sum 
of support for his son.  
                                                          
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, DOD CAF adjudicators reviewed the case using the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 
1, 2006. I decided the case using new AGs effective June 8, 2017, as well as the former guidelines, and 
my conclusions would be the same under either guideline.  
 
3 
 
 
In 2011, Applicant purchased property in India, with an estimated total value of 
approximately $60,000. (Tr. 30)  He bought  the house as an investment.  Applicant can 
sell the house after he has owned it for three years. (Tr. 68 ) Applicant fully disclosed all 
possible financial interests in India on his security clearance. He currently owns a house 
in the United States that is worth about $425,000. His current salary is about $120,000 
and his wife has recently started to work. He and his wife want to settle in his current state 
as they want their two daughters to receive a fine education.  He was emphatic that the 
United States is home now and forever. Applicant  testified credibly that some people 
come to India to find peace and he left India at the age of 27 because he wanted to live 
in the United States and become a U.S. citizen. He is proud to be a citizen of the United 
States. 
 
In 2007, Applicant  bought  stock ($1,000) in some Indian companies when the 
global market was booming.  The stocks are not worth as much as before and he can sell 
the stocks. His U.S. portfolio is about $30,000, and he has  retirement accounts that are 
worth about  $42,000. As to the four bank accounts in India, the total value is about 
$1,500. Two accounts are  inactive and dormant.  He will be closing the accounts. (Tr. 
72) Applicant also disclosed that he lived in Canada and has some Canadian 
investments. (GX 2) Applicant stated that he would not have purchased a property in India 
if he knew it could be an issue for a security clearance. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of India. His mother-in-law is a 
retired teacher. She has never had any connection with the Indian Government. His 
mother-in-law visited Applicant and his wife when lived in Canada and the first daughter 
was born.  (Tr. 34)  His father-in-law is deceased. Applicant’s wife speaks to her mother 
regularly and Applicant occasionally speaks to her on the phone. He also sends her some 
money. He communicates randomly with his wife’s sisters, and his two brothers-in-law. 
They work in private business and have no connections to the Indian government. None 
of his wife’s family know about his work. Applicant’s expertise is critical to the 
development of technologies that will protect certain important Department of Defense 
assets. His employer is aware of Applicant’s need for a security clearance to work on 
projects and nevertheless urges that Applicant continue to have a security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s parents and siblings, as well as his extended 
family are citizens and residents of India. (1.a-d)  The SOR also alleges that Applicant  
has financial interests in India, to include stocks, four bank accounts and a property in 
India.  (1.f-1.h) 
 
  Applicant admitted the Guideline B allegations with explanations. Applicant’s 
parents, brother and sister are citizens and resident of India. The last time he saw his 
family was in 2014 in a local attorney’s office. A major dispute occurred over property that 
his father purchased for the family in 2005 when Applicant married his second wife. 
Applicant referred to a Memorandum of Understanding that was issued previously that 
the property was for he and his siblings. The property is now worth over $1 million, but 
his father told Applicant that he has no rights to the property. Applicant  is now not 
4 
 
included  in the record as an owner. At this time he is not speaking to his family. 
Applicant’s father wants his son to return to India and Applicant has no desire to do so.  
(Tr. 32) His wife does not wish to return to India either. She wants to live in the United 
States with her two daughters. Applicant stated that there is no hope of reconciliation with 
his family. Applicant received a birthday call from his parents in 2016. He does not call 
them, and stated that when he sees the area code, he does not answer the phone. (Tr. 
58) 
 
Applicant’s father had a family business when Applicant was growing up. (Tr. 45) 
The business has been closed for many years. His father was also a teacher. Applicant 
sent his parents some money when he first came to the United States, but when he 
remarried in 2005, he stopped helping them financially. (Tr. 57) Applicant’s brother and 
his father have another business at this time. Applicant does not speak to his siblings. 
The last time he saw them was in 2014 in the local attorney’s office. His brother works in 
the family business. 
 
The Government acknowledged that Applicant was credible about his 
estrangement from his family in India. He is closer to his wife’s family. Applicant made 
one trip to India to wed his second wife in 2005. His other trip was in 2014 when he met 
with his family in the lawyer’s office and learned that he was no longer a joint owner of 
the Indian property. (Tr. 67) He and his wife stayed with his mother-in-law. 
 
Applicant stated that his wife did not even know about the security clearance 
process until recently when Applicant spoke to his FSO and discussed the hearing. 
Applicant clarified that he was never a citizen of Canada but lived there and worked there. 
He and his wife owned a home in Canada, but they sold it when they moved to the United 
States.  (Tr. 69) He is proud to be a first generation U.S. citizen from India and that future 
generations will be in the United States. He repeatedly stated that his oath of allegiance 
to the United States is one that he does not take lightly. Nothing could compel him to do 
something against the United States. 
 
  
Administrative Notice (Republic of India) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about the Republic of India: 
 
 The 2000 and 2008 Annual Reports to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage identified India as being involved in 
economic collection and industrial espionage.  
 
 In June 2013, a member of parliament in India and a close advisor to a now-
deceased chief minister was among those indicted by the U.S. Department of 
Justice for allegedly soliciting bribes for himself and other government officials 
in India in return for approving licenses to mine titanium minerals. 
 
5 
 
 As of March 2016, India continued to experience terrorist and insurgent 
activities. Anti-Western terrorist groups active in India, some of which are on 
the U.S. government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, include Islamist 
extremist groups Harkat-ul-Jihad, Harakat ul-Mujahidin, Indian Myjahideen, 
Jaish-e-Mohammed, and Lashker-e Tayyiba. 
 
 As of 2015, the most significant human rights problems involved police and 
security force abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape: 
corruption remained widespread and contributed to ineffective responses to 
crimes, including those against women, children, and members of scheduled 
castes or tribes, and societal violence based on gender, religious affiliation, and 
caste or tribe. Other human rights problems included disappearances, 
hazardous prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial 
detention. A lack of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government 
persisted, contributing to widespread impunity. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.2 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.4 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.5 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.6 The Government has the burden of presenting evidence 
to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.7 An applicant is 
responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that 
                                                          
2 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
3 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
5 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
7 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
6 
 
have been admitted or proven.8 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.9 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.10 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11 
 
     Discussion 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a  foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Four disqualifying conditions under this Guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign  person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology;  
                                                          
8 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
9 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 7(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement , manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s close family ties to his mother-in-law who is a citizen and resident of 
India, and his financial interest in India establish AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f).  A 
“heightened risk” is associated with India, given the significant human rights and terrorism 
problems existent there, and its history of economic collection and industrial espionage. 
 
Application of Guideline B is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely 
an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices 
that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.12 Family relationships 
can involve matters of influence or obligation.13 Therefore, Applicant’s family ties with his 
wife’s family, property ownership, and other financial interests in India raise concerns for 
which he has the burden of persuasion to mitigate.14   
 
The following mitigating conditions under this Guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or allegiance to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U. S. interest;  
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 99-0532 at 7 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2000) (When an applicant’s ties in a foreign country raise 
a prima facie security concern, the applicant is required to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation, or 
mitigation sufficient to carry his burden of persuasion that it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
to grant or continue a security clearance on his behalf). 
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
For the reasons set out in the discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b),  7(e) and 7(f), above, 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1999. He was naturalized in 2009. 
His marriage is to a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has two children who are U.S. citizens. 
Applicant has been estranged from his 20- year-old son since 1999. There is no hope for 
a future relationship. He is now estranged from his parents and siblings due to a property 
dispute. He does not communicate with them or care to see them. The last time he saw 
them was in 2014 for a legal reason. None of his family or in-laws have connections to 
the Indian government.  
 
Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. 
that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
There is little likelihood that Applicant’s communications with his Mother-in-law could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant’s Indian bank accounts are 
dormant for the most part. He will sell the Indian property that he and his wife own as 
soon as he is able. His financial status in the United States far outweighs the financial 
interests in India. His stocks are not worth as much as his liquid assets in the United 
States. Neither the bank accounts or Applicant’s stocks are of any financial significance 
to Applicant, in light of his substantial retirement and savings accounts and his home in 
the United State. Applicant’s  property interest in India are such that they are unlikely to 
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure 
the individual. I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(b), (c), and (f) apply.  
 
    Conclusion 
 
The record does not create doubt about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.15 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 2(d)(1)-(9). In that consideration, I gave positive weight to the Applicant’s credibility, demeanor and 
maturity.   
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:                    For Applicant 
   
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
