1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          ---------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-07825 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised by his 
use of marijuana, but he did mitigate the allegation that he deliberately failed to disclose 
his marijuana use in his security clearance application. Accordingly, this case is decided 
against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on June 19, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On April 29, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudication Guidelines (AG), 
2 
 
in a civil court case. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guidelines known as Guideline H for drug involvement and substance abuse and 
Guideline E for personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on May 17, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 27, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on the next day. He was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on July 5, 2016.3 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were 12 items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 10.4 Exhibits 1, and 3 through 10 are admitted into 
evidence. Exhibit 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview 
that took place during the August 2015 background investigation. The ROI is not 
authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s 
written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.    
 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My Decision and 
Formal Findings under the revised Guidelines H and E would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 28, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated July 5, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 
days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first item in the FORM is the SOR, and the second item is Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and 
the Answer are the pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 3 through 12 are marked 
as Exhibits 1 through 10.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 22 years old, a high school graduate with some college credits. He 
has never been married and has no children. Since June 2015, he has worked for a 
defense contractor. This was Applicant’s first application for a security clearance.6  
 
The SOR alleged that (1) Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
2009 until September 2015, (2) in 2015 he tested positive for marijuana during his 
employer’s testing program, and (3) he falsified his security clearance application by 
failing to disclose that usage.7 Applicant admitted the drug usage but explained that from 
December 2013 until September 2015, he was enrolled in a state medical marijuana 
program to treat symptoms of chronic pain. He also explained that before his drug test, 
he told his employer that it would come back positive. He admitted that his answer in his 
security clearance application about drug usage was inaccurate.8 Applicant’s Answer 
included a letter from his immediate supervisor praising the quality of Applicant’s work 
and his work ethic.9 The medical use of marijuana is legal in the state where Applicant 
lives.  
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”11 Under Egan, E.O. 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 1.  
 
7 SOR ¶¶ 1 & 2.  
 
8 Answer, p. 1.  
 
9 Answer, p. 2.  
 
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
4 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19 
 
      Discussion 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 Under AG H for drug use,20 suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put 
into doubt because drug use can both impair judgment and raise questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to with laws, rules and regulations: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any 
of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 24, 25 and 26 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 AG ¶ 25(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and,  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.   
 
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana from 2009 until September 2015 and that 
he tested positive for the use of marijuana in September 2015, as alleged in the SOR. 
Facts admitted by an applicant in an answer to a Statement of Reasons require no further 
proof by the Government.21 Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance, and its 
possession is regulated by the federal government under the Controlled Substances 
Act.22 The knowing or intentional possession and use of any controlled substance is 
unlawful and punishable by imprisonment and or a fine.23 In an October 25, 2014 
memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the use of marijuana is 
relevant to national security determinations, regardless of changes to state laws 
concerning marijuana use.24 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (b) apply. 
 
I have considered mitigating factor AG ¶ 26(a). Applicant’s marijuana use occurred  
with varying frequency from sometime in 2009 until September 2015. His behavior was 
neither infrequent, nor did it occur long ago, with his last use being less than two years 
ago. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”25 A statement is false or dishonest 
when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR 
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 
(App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal 
basis for an Administrative Judge’s findings”).   
 
22 21 U.S.C. § 811 et seq.   
 
23 21 U.S.C. § 844. 
 
24 James R. Clapper, Director of National Intelligence, Memorandum: Adherence to Federal Laws 
Prohibiting Marijuana Use (October 25, 2014). See also http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml. 
 
 
 
25 AG ¶ 15.   
 
6 
 
information is not deliberate if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the 
information, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances.26 Here, the SOR alleged 
that Applicant “deliberately failed to disclose” his marijuana use in his security clearance 
application. His answer to the SOR was that his response to the security clearance 
application question was “inaccurate,” not that he deliberately falsified his response. I take 
that as a denial of the allegation, which leaves the burden of proof with the Government. 
 
        When Applicant completed his security clearance application, he was 21 years old 
and had been enrolled in his state’s medical marijuana program since December 2013 
for chronic pain symptoms. I take administrative notice that the state where Applicant lives 
has a statutory medical marijuana program and that one of the qualifying conditions is 
chronic pain.27 This was Applicant’s first foray into the security clearance process. 
Because Applicant was enrolled in a statutory medical marijuana program, it is fair to 
conclude that when he filled out his application, he reasonably did not know, or genuinely 
thought that his marijuana use did not need to be reported, because it was legal in his 
state. Under these circumstances, I find that the Government did not carry its burden of 
proving that Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance application.   
 
 The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, 
and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.28 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information.29 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     Against Applicant  
                                                          
26 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9) (explaining the “whole-person” concept and factors).  
 
27 The Government contends, correctly, that 23 states and the District of Columbia have passed laws 
allowing the use of marijuana under varying circumstances, including for medical use. Government Brief, 
p. 5, note 11.  
 
28 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6). I took into positive account the complimentary character reference letter 
submitted by Applicant’s supervisor.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
