 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07303 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence and Guideline C, foreign preference. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2016 and August 7, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 7, 2016, the case was 
 
2 
 
 
assigned to me. On January 17, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for February 23, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but did not offer documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Motion to Withdraw and Amend Allegation 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw the sole allegation under ¶ 2 of the SOR 
and amend the SOR to list that same allegation as SOR ¶ 1.c under Guideline B. 
Applicant did not object and the motion was granted.1 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Israel. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.2 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S Government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s second answer to the SOR, he denied the allegation in ¶ 1.c, but 
admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Those admissions are incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He was born in Uzbekistan in 1985. He lived there for 
12 years, until he moved to Israel with his mother. Once he moved to Israel and lived 
with his mother, who is an Israeli citizen, he automatically attained Israeli citizenship. 
When he turned 16, he came to the United States to live with his father. In 2002, he 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 10-14. 
 
2 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) I. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
 
became a U.S resident alien and two years later in 2004, he became a U.S. citizen. He 
graduated from high school, college, and graduate school in the United States. He is 
single with no children. He has worked for his current defense contractor employer 
since 2010. He is an engineer.5 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother and half-brother are citizens and 
residents of Israel. It also alleges Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Israel, and he maintains his Israeli citizenship because of fear of being arrested, jailed, 
or forced to serve in the Israeli military if he returned to Israel. 
  
 Applicant’s mother, who is 50 years old, is a resident and citizen of Israel. His 
half-brother is 19 years old and is a resident and citizen of Israel. Neither have any ties 
to the Israeli government. His mother works in the private sector. His half-brother is 
autistic and not subject to military service in Israel. His mother and half-brother have 
never visited Applicant in the United States.6 
 
 Applicant stays in touch with his mother by electronic communications two to 
three times a month. He does not receive any financial assistance from his mother. He 
loaned her about $10,000 to help her buy an apartment in Israel. He has no property or 
assets in Israel. He sees his mother and half-brother every three to four years. They 
meet in countries outside either the United States or Israel.7 
 
 Applicant has never returned to Israel since he left there when he was 16 to 
come to the United States. He only has a current U.S. Passport. His Israeli passport 
expired in 2004 and he has not renewed it. He only used it once to travel to the United 
States when he was 16. He has attempted to renounce his Israeli citizenship, but the 
Israeli government has not cooperated in his effort. He tried to renounce by going “on-
line” and sending letters to the appropriate offices. In 2012, he went to an Israeli 
consulate office in an attempt to renounce his Israeli citizenship, but he was told he 
would have to go to Israel to do so. In approximately 2004, his mother received a letter 
from the Israeli government inquiring into Applicant’s status as it related to Israeli 
compulsory military service. His mother hired an attorney to deal with the matter and no 
further inquiries were received. He has never been contacted directly by the Israeli 
government. He has never voted in an Israeli election. Applicant considers himself only 
a U.S. citizen.8 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 5-6, 20-22, 28; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-25, 29. 
 
7 Tr. at 23, 38-39. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-24, 26-31, 35. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $100,000. He has an investment 
account with about $7,500 and a 401K account with about $120,000. He currently rents 
his home.9 
  
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with 
the United States. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S. 
Middle East policy since Israel’s inception. Both countries have a mutual interest in 
a peaceful, secure Middle East. On July 27, 2012, President Obama signed the 
United States-Israel Enhanced Security Cooperation Act. The goal of this legislation is 
to strengthen the military edge that Israel enjoys over its regional enemies.  
 
Israel aggressively targets sensitive U.S. technology. There have been some 
cases of U.S. government employees who have been prosecuted and convicted of 
spying against the U.S. for Israel. In 1998, Israel acknowledged that one of these 
individual’s had been its agent.  
 
The threat of terrorist attacks is growing in ungoverned or minimally 
governed areas near Israel’s borders with Syria, Lebanon, the Sinai Peninsula, and 
Libya. However, some unconventional security threats have been reduced because 
of factors such as heightened security measures vis a vis Palestinians, missile 
defense systems, and cyberwarfare capabilities.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 41-42, 45. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member is not, as a matter 
of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship 
with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship 
between Israel and the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his 
relatives living in Israel do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist his relatives living in Israel who might be coerced by governmental 
entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”10 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Israel seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his relatives 
living in Israel, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign influence.  
 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who live in Israel. Applicant communicates with his Israeli relatives on a monthly basis. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this presumption. 
Given the Israeli intelligence approach toward the United States, Applicant’s 
relationships with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The 
allegation that Applicant maintains his Israeli citizenship in order to avoid being 
arrested, jailed, or forced to serve in the Israeli military was not supported by the 
evidence. AG ¶ 7(i) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies. Applicant’s mother and half-brother are not in 
government positions and do not have affiliations with the Israeli government. It is 
unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between his 
Israeli relatives’ interests and those of the United States.  
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He has resided in this country since 2002 and he 
became a citizen in 2004. He owns U.S.-based assets worth approximately $195,000. 
He has never returned to Israel. The evidence supports that Applicant has longstanding 
ties to the United States and would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance at this time. I considered the ties he established in this 
country, thereby demonstrating his longstanding loyalty to this country. Therefore, he 
provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph       2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
