1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 15-07158 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference concerns generated by his application for 
French citizenship in 2005. Conversely, financial considerations security concerns remain 
unmitigated because Applicant has yet to file multiple income tax returns dating as far back 
as tax year 2007.  Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline C, foreign preference, 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On May 10, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the allegations and 
requesting a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on December 6, 2016. On 
February 1, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, 
scheduling Applicant’s case for March 16, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I 
received two Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 2), and four Applicant’s exhibits (AE A and 
D). At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, to allow him to 
submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted 12 exhibits that I 
incorporated into the record as AE E through AE P. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
March 24, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 50-year-old man who has been married for 21 years. He has a high 
school diploma and has earned some college credits over the years. He is a federal 
government subcontractor who programs and designs remote audiovisual systems. (Tr. 40) 
He has been in business since 1999. (Tr. 30)  
 
 By 2005, the business had grown to the point that Applicant’s wife decided to quit 
her full-time job and begin working as its corporate secretary. In this capacity, she was 
responsible for bookkeeping. (Tr. 42) 
 
 The first year that Applicant’s wife was on the job, her father passed away after a 
lengthy illness. (Tr. 18) Approximately a year later, in 2008, Applicant’s mother suffered a 
debilitating illness, and in 2012, Applicant’s father suffered a disabling injury. Applicant’s 
wife was unable to balance her responsibilities as the company record keeper with her 
responsibilities as the primary caretaker for these relatives. (Tr. 23)  
 
 In 2007, a massive computer glitch corrupted all of the Applicant’s company’s 
financial records, making them completely inaccessible. (GE 2 at 4; Tr. 43) The company’s 
problems were exacerbated further that year when the national economic downturn led to a 
revenue decrease. Before the downturn, Applicant retained an accountant to file his 
business’ income tax returns. After the downturn, he could no longer afford an accountant, 
and tried to save money by relying on accounting students, assisting his wife, to file his 
income tax returns (AEs N, O) Ultimately, Applicant and his wife did not file their federal or 
state income tax returns after tax year 2006, and have not filed any tax returns since then.  
 
 Applicant and his wife attempted to file their tax returns over the years themselves, 
but were overwhelmed with the complexity of the task, as they have not prepared any profit 
and loss information since 2007. (Tr. 23)  Applicant retained a licensed accountant 
approximately six months before the hearing to help him file his income tax returns. 
Currently, the accountant   is preparing  Applicant’s 2007 income tax returns and will file 
the income tax returns for tax years 2008 to 2015, successively. (Tr. 21)  
 
 Applicant does not know the amount of federal income tax that he owes. He 
contacted the state taxing authority in 2012. A representative informed him that he owed 
approximately $27,000 of delinquent income taxes, and helped him to arrange a payment 
3 
 
plan. Consistent with the plan, Applicant began paying $400 per month. (AE J)  Applicant 
has been making intermittent payments since then. (AE J – AE L) As of June 2015, the 
balance was approximately $24,500. (AE L) 
 
 Applicant’s late mother was a French citizen when Applicant was born. When she 
became a U.S. citizen in 1970, she had to renounce her French citizenship. In 2005, she 
applied for reinstatement of her French citizenship after a change in French law enabled 
her to do so.  She desired that her children became French citizens so that they could sign 
their names in a special registry that contains the names of French citizens worldwide. (Tr. 
49; GE 2 at 1)  Applicant is a U.S. citizen from birth and has never traveled to France. (GE 
1 at 2)  However, he decided to fulfil his mother’s wish. Therefore, in 2005, he went to the 
local French consulate, and with his mother’s help, completed the appropriate paperwork to 
become a French citizen, and signed his name in the registry. (Tr. 49) He continues to 
have dual citizenship, and has expressed a willingness to renounce his French citizenship. 
(GE 2 at 2) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
4 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant has not filed federal and state income tax returns in nine years. 
Although he does not know if he owes any federal income tax, he owes 
approximately $24,000 in delinquent state income tax. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligation,”  and AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual federal, state, or 
local income tax returns as required , , .,” apply. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;”  
 
AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  
 
 Applicant’s ongoing failure to file income tax returns renders AG ¶ 20(a)  
inapplicable. He fell behind because of a data crash that caused him to lose much 
of his company records, and an economic downturn which affected his company’s 
profitability. In addition, his wife was unable to properly manage their company’s 
financial records after she  became preoccupied with the care of her ailing mother 
and her parents-in-law. All of these factors constitute circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, nearly ten years have elapsed since these problems 
first began to manifest themselves, and Applicant has only recently retained an 
accountant to organize his financial records and start the filing process. Under these 
circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) has little weight. 
 
 Applicant’s hiring of an accountant to begin preparing his delinquent tax 
returns triggers the application of AG ¶ 20(d). Given that he just recently retained 
the accountant to begin working on these issues, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
  Incurring delinquent income taxes poses a security risk that is more serious than 
incurring commercial delinquencies, as it indicates that Applicant may “have a problem 
abiding by well-established rules and regulations.” (ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (June 15, 
2016) at 4)  Consequently, Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
 Under this guideline, “when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.” (AG ¶ 9) Applicant’s acquisition of French citizenship triggers the application of AG 
6 
 
¶ 10(b), “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen.” Applicant has expressed a willingness to renounce his French citizenship. AG 
¶11(b), “the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” applies.   
 
 Applicant has never traveled to France. He applied for French citizenship solely to 
fulfil the sentimental desire of his mother, now deceased, for her children to become 
French citizens, and for their names to appear in an archive of French citizens worldwide. 
Under these circumstances, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign preference 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
A series of misfortunes contributed to Applicant’s failure to file his income tax 
returns. However, filing one’s tax returns is a legal obligation. Consequently, Applicant’s 
personal and financial difficulties have limited probative value when considering mitigation. 
Moreover, this problem has been ongoing for nearly ten years. Under these circumstances, 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against  Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
