 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08364 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. The personal 
conduct allegations were not supported by evidence of intentional falsification. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
December 15, 2014. On May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal 
conduct.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 22, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on July 25, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who had an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 1, 2016. She did not respond to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2017. On June 1, 2017, Applicant was 
provided an opportunity to submit any matters in mitigation. She submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A. All exhibits are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant had a delinquent consumer debt and a judgment by a 
debt collector totaling approximately $16,850. Additionally, the SOR alleged Applicant 
falsified her SCA by failing to report the two SOR debts and one other debt that was 
charged off in 2014. Applicant denied the allegations, and provided explanations in her 
answer to the SOR. Her admissions and explanations are incorporated in my findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since 
2002. She graduated from high school in 1980. She has been married since 2010 and 
has one adult child. She was previously married in 1983 and divorced in 1984, married 
and divorced in 1991, and finally married in 1993 and divorced in 2005. Her last security 
clearance was granted in 2005. She reported no financial delinquencies in her SCA. 
 
 Applicant was confronted with the consumer and bank delinquent accounts during 
her interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator in March 2015. 
She reported that she was surprised to hear of the debts, and believed the consumer debt 
may have been her husband’s credit card since she did not have a charge account at the 
store, and they kept their finances separate. She also was surprised about a bank credit 
card charged-off in 2014 since she has a charge card account with the bank that is not 
delinquent. She did not know of the delinquent accounts alleged, but resolved to research 
and pay them. 
 
 Applicant stated in her answer to the SOR that the two debts (consumer debt and 
judgment) alleged under Guideline F are the same debts. The original debt was 
approximately $8,000. She stated that when she completed the SCA in December 2014, 
she was unaware of the delinquent debts, current or past, and there was no judgment 
filed against her at the time. However, Applicant accepted responsibility once informed of 
the debts, researched them and began negotiations with the bank, creditor and debt 
collector to resolve them. She contacted the bank that reported the charged-off account 
and paid the debt in-full in August 2015. Regarding her conversations with the collection 
                                                     
guidelines (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified 
in 32 C.F.R. ¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
3 
 
agency and consumer creditor, she disputed an $839 portion of the debt being charged 
by the collection agency. Despite her efforts, they opted to file a judgment action in August 
2015. Applicant settled the judgment in-full in June 2016. When she later determined the 
judgment was not removed from her credit report, she hired counsel to assist her to 
resolve the matter. She stated that she did not knowingly or deliberately omit any 
information from her SCA as the debts were unknown to her and the judgment was filed 
after she completed her SCA. 
 
 She noted that she has maintained complete transparency with her supervisor and 
program director throughout her 14-year career and during the process to resolve her 
financial matters. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.3 
The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law that no 
one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, “the 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
 
4 
 
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the Directive, any 
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will 
be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following may be potentially applicable:  
 
                                                     
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were resolved in 2015 and 2016. She acted responsibly to 
resolve her debts once she became aware of them during her OPM interview. She 
addressed the debts within a month of discovering their existence, and negotiated 
settlements and paid them. When she determined the judgment was not removed from 
her credit report, she hired counsel to resolve the matter. Generally, Applicant has shown 
that her financial concerns are resolved and under control. Her delinquent debts no longer 
cast doubts on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a),(b),(c), 
(d), and (e) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.6 An applicant’s level 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.7 
 
  Applicant asserted that when she completed her SCA in 2014, she was not aware 
of any delinquent debts, collections, or judgments in her name. Once she learned of the 
debts during the OPM interview, she diligently pursued their resolution. The judgment on 
one of these debts was filed after she completed her SCA, and only when she disputed 
a portion of the debt while attempting to resolve it. There is insufficient evidence to show 
she deliberately and intentionally misled the government when she completed her SCA. 
She asserted that the delinquent accounts in question were not known to her, but her 
husband had one of the store credit cards, and she has an up-to-date charge card with 
the bank that reported a charged-off account in 2014. Although applicant’s are expected 
to carefully read the questionnaire and answer truthfully, based on the evidence in the 
record, Applicant’s omissions fail to rise to the level of intentional or deliberate 
falsifications. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
                                                     
6 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
7 
 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guidelines F and E in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Overall, Applicant did not deliberately falsify her SCA by failing to disclose 
delinquent or past-due debts, or a judgment. In addition, her good-faith efforts to resolve 
delinquent debts as soon as she became aware of them, leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to her eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
