 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-03588 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 22, 2014, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 4, 2016. She answered the 
SOR in writing on April 20, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on May 4, 
2016. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 27, 2017, and I 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
received the case assignment on February 13, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on February 27, 2017, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 15, 2017. 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 29, 2017. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in Paragraph 2 of 
the SOR (Tr. 8). She also provided additional information to support her request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, married and has one child. She has a high school 
degree. She works for a defense contractor as a video teleconference operator. She 
started that job about three years ago. Her income is about $34,500. Her husband is 
employed. They moved around the country for employment purposes in the past five 
years. She was unemployed from April 2004 to September 2005, while her husband 
was deployed with the Army National Guard. She was also unemployed from February 
2012 to November 2012. Applicant then moved from her home state to another state. 
She was laid off from her job in her second state of residence in March 2014 and was 
unemployed until September 2014, when she obtained her current job in her current 
state of residence. Her husband has had some periods of unemployment since 2005. 
He is currently employed. Applicant is the main wage earner in the family. Her daughter 
requires special education and care because of past problems. (Tr. 15-38; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant owes 17 delinquent debts totaling $18,112. They consist of debts owed 
to medical providers, telephone service companies, an unpaid portion of an apartment 
lease, and utility company charges for service. The medical debts are for Applicant and 
her daughter’s medical needs. The debts date back to 2010 at least. She paid two 
debts, the medical account for $87 (subparagraph 1.k) and the dental debt for $51 
(subparagraph 1.o). She is paying on the utility debt for $521 (subparagraph 1.n) at the 
rate of $20 monthly deducted from her checking account for the past two years. The 
current amount owed is about $120. Applicant has resolved or is resolving these three 
debts. (Tr. 43-45, 49, 73; Exhibits 1-4, A, B, F) 
 
 Applicant was aware of her delinquent debts after the interview with the 
government investigator in October 2014. After receiving the SOR on March 24, 2016, 
Applicant entered a debt management and repayment plan with a non-profit debt 
counseling organization. Applicant stated her creditors, except for the utility company, 
were not contacting her and demanding payment, so she concentrated her attention on 
her family and paying for the usual monthly food, transportation, clothing, and rental 
costs. The not-for-profit debt management program has eight delinquent debts listed in 
it for the first segment to be repaid. The amount of the debts listed in the program is 
 
3 
 
 
$4,768. Those debts will be repaid in 29 months. Then the remaining debts will be 
added to the program, Applicant will keep paying her monthly $200 and within the total 
term of the repayment program, 60 months, the SOR-listed debts will be resolved. The 
program was recommended by her local credit union. Since April 2016 when she 
enrolled in the program, she has had $200 monthly deducted from her paycheck. The 
money is used by the program to pay the delinquent debts. The 14 debts are being 
resolved in an orderly manner through the debt management plan. They are being paid 
through that plan. Applicant submitted copies of her agreement with the not-for-profit 
organization. (Tr. 40-76; Exhibits 2, 3, C, D) 
 
 Applicant admitted that when she had back surgery in October 2016, she had to 
stop payments to the repayment program because she was out of work for four months. 
She started again paying the $200 monthly into the plan in March 2017, and will keep 
doing so until her debts are resolved. Applicant has health insurance and is paying $62 
monthly on the deductible cost of the surgery. She had an earlier back surgery in 2010 
on which she owes $5,330 (subparagraph 1.p). That debt will be placed in the 
repayment program according to the plan’s outline. (Tr. 40-73, 78; Exhibits 2, 3, B, C)   
 
 Applicant’s car was destroyed in an accident with a tractor trailer truck in January 
2017. The transportation company paid her for the value of her 2011 car. She 
purchased a new automobile for which she pays $420 monthly, the same amount as her 
older car. She needed reliable transportation and thought a new car would save her on 
repair costs. She lives about a half hour driving time from her job at a government 
installation. (Tr. 60-63; Exhibits 2, 3, A, B) 
 
 Applicant is current on all her Federal and state income tax returns. She uses her 
tax refunds of about $2,100 annually to pay bills and get caught up on other debts. She 
has a savings account at her credit union with a minimal amount in it. She does not 
have a checking account. She uses her debit card for purchases. She also has three 
credit cards, each having balances of about $280 on them. She pays the required 
minimum payment on each monthly. Applicant has not obtained any financial 
counseling. (Tr. 58-68; Exhibits 2, 3, A, B) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2004. She was discharged in 
February 2005. She filed that bankruptcy because she had spent too much money with 
her credit cards because neither she nor her husband had good jobs. (Tr. 34, 35)   
 
 Applicant did not disclose her delinquent debts on the September 22, 2014 e-QIP 
in response to Section 26 questions about unpaid financial obligations. She asserted 
she forgot to list any because they were older debts and she thought the question 
referred to her current debts. She could not remember the specific debts and could not 
list them. She also claims she checked the wrong box in the answer section because 
she misunderstood what information was sought by Section 26. The question asked for 
a list of unpaid debts within the last seven years and contained further specific 
questions about the status of her financial obligations. She also testified she completed 
 
4 
 
 
a lot of forms when she was starting her job and was overwhelmed by all the questions. 
(Tr. 76-80; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant submitted a favorable letter of recommendation from her supervisor. 
He describes her as responsible, organized, and efficient. She has great rapport with 
her customers. He receives positive comments about her. Applicant also submitted two 
employee evaluations showing she was marked as “good” or “very good” in all 
categories. (Exhibit E) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Three conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
   
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $18,112 in delinquent debt from 2010 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has 17 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence 
raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or 
identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Applicant lost employment several times since 2012. Her husband is not 
regularly employed. They have moved three times since 2012. She was laid off one 
time because the company downsized. She has had two back surgeries in the past 
seven years. Her daughter requires medical attention regularly for her problems. All of 
these conditions adversely affected her ability to constantly pay her debts. She has now 
paid two debts and is paying a third utility debt. Her remaining delinquent debts she has 
taken action to place in a not-for-profit debt management and repayment program on 
which she pays $200 monthly. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances that 
she has. AG ¶ 20 (b) is established. AG ¶ 20 (c) is also applicable because of the not-
for-profit debt repayment organization she is using to resolve remaining debts.  
 
Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay three debts. She sought advice 
from her credit union about how to resolve the remaining debts. She voluntarily 
undertook that action last year and is actively engaged in repaying her 14 remaining 
debts. AG ¶ 20 (d) is established.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 16 contains seven disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. One disqualifying condition may apply: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 Appellant failed to list her delinquent debts on her e-QIP in September 2014. She 
admitted she knew there were unpaid debts, but misunderstood the question and did 
not want to list anything incorrectly. Therefore, she denied having any delinquent debts. 
AG ¶ 16 (a) requires a deliberate effort to falsify information on Applicant’s e-QIP. Her 
record of employment and moving three times in about four years is reasonable to 
support her contention that she forgot the specifics of her debts and with the pressures 
of filling out many employment forms when she started her current position. Her 
assertion that she misunderstood what she was to enter on the e-QIP and checked the 
incorrect box is reasonable. There was no deliberate falsification here, based on her 
testimony and demeanor.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 17 contains seven conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Without any deliberate falsification there is no need to apply any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is the main wage earner in 
her family. Her husband works when he can find a job. Her daughter has problems 
requiring Applicant’s attention on a daily basis. Applicant has to work and manage the 
home. She has had to move her family three times in the past five years to find 
employment and lower the cost of living so they can survive. Applicant is paying her 
debts in an orderly manner. It will take time to do so, but she is trying her best to 
manage her family finances and pay her current bills and the debts that arose when she 
and her husband were unemployed, and when Applicant could not work because of 
back problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
