 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06342  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 19, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 11, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2016. He denied all of the SOR 
allegations concerning his Foreign Influence, and requested that his case be decided by 
an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On August 24, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
on August 25, 2016, and received by him on August 30, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to 
respond to the FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on June 5, 2017. Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Russia. Department Counsel provided a nine page summary of the facts, supported by 
16 Government documents pertaining to Russia.  The documents provide elaboration 
and context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the 
U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject 
to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He is married. He has a Bachelor’s degree.  He is 
employed with a defense contractor as a Principal Consultant.   He is seeking to obtain 
a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant is a Russian citizen by birth.  Applicant became a naturalized United 
States citizen on May 13, 2010 and gave up his Russian citizenship at that time.  For 
the past fourteen years, he has worked for various American companies.  Since 
January 2014, he has been working for his current employer.  He has never held a 
security clearance before.  Applicant travels for his employment 75 percent of the time, 
and works from home the remaining 25 percent of the time.  (Government Exhibit 4.)   
 
Applicant’s mother, father, brother, and half-sister are citizens and residents of 
Russia.  Applicant’s mother’s former employment was either that of an editor or a house 
wife, as the record is not clear.  Applicant’s father is employed by the Russian 
government as an Engineer.  There is no evidence as to what his brother does.  His 
half-sister works for a travel agency in Russia.  Applicant travels for in-person visits to 
 
3 
 
see his family. The record is not clear where those visits took place.  Applicant visited 
with his family in August 2002; January 2003; October 2010; and September 2014.  
Applicant also maintains contact with his family via telephone and electronic 
communications.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  During his subject interview, Applicant 
stated that his relatives in Russia do not know that he is applying for a security 
clearance.  (Government Exhibit 4.)     
 
 Applicant is married to a native-born American citizen.  They have financial 
holdings in the United States, including bank accounts, property, and investment 
accounts.  He states that they plan to live, work and retire in the United States.  
(Government Exhibit 2.)    
 
Two letters of recommendation, one from Applicant’s supervisor, and the other 
from a long time friend, were submitted on behalf of the Applicant.  They collectively 
indicated that Applicant has always been a professional, dedicated, trustworthy and 
honest person in their eyes.  He is described as being very organized, competent, and 
an individual of high character.  They both recommend him for a security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)      
 
 
Notice 
 
According to information complied for the National Counterintelligence 
Executive’s 2011 Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage, Russia remains one of the top two most aggressive and capable collectors 
of sensitive U.S. economic information and technologies, particularly cyberspace. 
Russian intelligence services continue to target U.S. and allied personnel with access to 
sensitive computer network information.  Russia seeks data on advanced weapon 
systems and proprietary information from U.S. companies and research institutions that 
deal with energy, finance, the media, defense and dual use technology.  No matter what 
the consequences, Russia has been relentless in their attempt to illegally gather our 
most sensitive economic, defense technology and other intelligence information.  
Russia goes to extraordinary lengths through covert agents and diabolical schemes to 
obtain this information which a serious and direct threat to the national security of the 
United States.  The United States continues the effort to fight against this threat by 
conducting highly complex and sensitive counterespionage investigations and 
prosecutions to ensure that our sensitive technology does not get into the wrong hands.      
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
 
5 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members are residents and citizens of Russia.  
Applicant maintains close and continuing contact with his family.  Applicant’s ties to his 
family members who are citizens and residents in a country of heightened concern 
poses a security risk for the United States Government.  The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 and none of them are applicable in this case.   
 
 Family ties in a foreign country raises a prima facie security concern that 
required the applicant to “present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation 
sufficient to meet the burden of persuasion that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a  security clearance for him”.  Thus, Applicant bears the 
burden to establish that his relatives are not vulnerable to influence, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  More importantly, Applicant is at a higher risk of being target for 
Russian intelligence gathering since he works for a defense contractor.  He has failed to 
meet this burden and failed to establish that any of the six mitigating conditions under 
Guideline B apply.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant performs well at his job and has the endorsement of his supervisor and 
a close friend.  It is noted that while he was born in Russia, he is an American by 
choice. However, he has close and continuing contact with his family in Russia.  Other 
than his wife, his closest familial ties are with them.  Given the nature of Applicant’s 
work, the nature of the foreign country, his foreign contact with his family, and his 
father’s work for the Russian Government, a significant security risk remains evident.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
