 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07696 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 18, 2015. On May 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.1 
 
                                                     
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 22, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on August 3, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 11, 2016, but he did submit 
evidence in mitigation or assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. The 
Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $64,532.  Applicant 
admitted all the allegations in the SOR with an explanation. Applicant is 45 years old. He 
earned an associate’s degree in 1995, and has been employed by a defense contractor 
since 2015. He was married in 1996 and divorced in 2004. He has one child, five years 
old. The debts alleged in the SOR include charged-off consumer credit card debts and a 
substantial line of credit delinquency. 
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for the debts as a result of his divorce in 2004. 
He became financially overextended when he lost his job in 2008 due to a plant closing. 
In 2009, he moved from his home in state “A” to take a job in state “B,” but at a 
substantially reduced salary. He was unemployed for about nine months. He sought 
assistance from a credit/debt repair company, and attributes the line of credit for that 
purpose. However, he discovered that only a few debts were resolved by the company 
before all of his deposited funds were used to pay fees. He recognized that he did not 
fully read the agreement before beginning the process. He discontinued the service, but 
continued to have unpaid delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
3 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.2 
In Department of Navy v. Egan3, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is 
less than a preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established law 
that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, 
“the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the 
Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
2 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
4 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties and unresolved delinquent 
debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:6  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
                                                     
6 AG ¶ 20.f is not applicable. 
 
5 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
  Applicant incurred debts because of a divorce and unemployment. He found work 
in another state after nine months of unemployment, but at a reduced salary. Divorce and 
a loss employment are mitigating factors to consider, but Applicant’s financial liability has 
not been sufficiently addressed. Although Applicant stated that he initiated good-faith 
efforts to resolve his debts through use of a debt repair company, he did not account for 
the fees required to continue the service, and he discontinued it before resolving the debts 
alleged in the SOR.  He has not shown evidence of efforts to resolve the SOR debts 
despite steady employment with a government contractor since 2015, and he has not 
presented evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶ 20 (b) and (d) are partially applicable, 
but Applicant’s inability to complete the debt resolution plan and failure to take other 
efforts to address his outstanding debts, prevents full application of mitigating credit. 
 
  Applicant’s intentions were admirable, and he undertook responsibility to attempt 
to address his debts, but unfortunately, the results do not reflect his efforts. The totality of 
the continued delinquent debts and Applicant’s apparent inability to address them leaves 
me with doubts about his overall financial condition and ability or willingness to face his 
financial responsibilities. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment, and leaves him vulnerable to the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant suffered a divorce and nine months of unemployment. However, he has 
been unable or unwilling to prudently manage his finances so that he can pay his 
delinquent obligations. He offered no documentary evidence of his debt resolution efforts 
or his current financial status. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
