 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07147 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lori M. Brown, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his lack of candor during a security clearance interview. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a hearing. 
 
 On February 23, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified and called two witnesses. The documentary evidence offered by 
the parties was admitted into the administrative record. (Government Exhibits 1 – 4 and 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). DOD 
CAF adjudicators reviewed the case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, dated 
September 1, 2006, which were in effect at the time. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits A – I.)2 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted additional exhibits, which 
were also admitted into the record. (Exhibits J and K.)3 The transcript (Tr.) was received 
on March 2, 2017, and the record closed on March 24, 2017.4 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
New Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”5 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.6 In light of this 
explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines.7 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).8 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive and without objection, the SOR was 
amended to correct a minor typographical error. (Tr. 165-171; Exhibit 3.) 
 
  
                                                          
2 Applicant’s objection to Exhibit 3 was overruled. Tr. 22-26. No further objections, except as further 
discussed herein, were raised. ISCR Case No 03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007) (“the DOHA process 
encourages Judges to err on the side of initially admitting evidence into the record, and then to consider . . 
. what, if any, weight to give to that evidence.”).  
 
3 Exhibit J consists of Applicant’s February 24, 2017 email and two attachments. Exhibit K consists of 
Applicant’s March 17, 2017 email and two attachments, as well as Department Counsel’s response noting 
no objection to the admission of the Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits.  
 
4 Correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are attached to the record as 
Appellate Exhibits I – III.  
 
5 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
6 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
7 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same. 
 
8 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated the following, “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable 
law and agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
3 
 
 
Reconsideration of Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.13, states, in pertinent part: 
 
As far in advance as practical, Department Counsel and the applicant shall 
serve one another with a copy of any pleading, proposed documentary 
evidence, or other written communication to be submitted to the 
Administrative Judge.9 
 
 On December 13, 2016, I issued an order, requiring the parties to exchange 
documents before the hearing. (Appellate Exhibit III.) Department Counsel submitted 
proof that the Government forwarded Exhibits 1 – 4 to Applicant before the hearing. 
(Exhibit 4.)10  
 
 During cross-examination, Department Counsel offered documentary evidence of 
purported misconduct allegedly committed by Applicant at a different job. Specifically, a 
2012 internal corporate email complaining about Applicant’s purported unprofessional 
conduct and unsatisfactory work. This email from a third-party witness who did not testify 
at hearing was marked and is included in the record as Appellate Exhibit IV.11  
 
 Applicant had not been provided or seen a copy of this internal corporate email 
before Department Counsel attempted to cross-examine him with it at hearing. No witness 
was called by the Government to authenticate the email or to vouch for its veracity. This 
new allegation of employee misconduct is not related to the SOR allegations and it 
purportedly occurred after the alleged events referenced in the SOR. 
 
 Department Counsel offered Appellate Exhibit IV to show conduct consistent with 
or in conformity with the employee misconduct alleged in SOR 1.a. It was also offered to 
rebut Applicant’s claim that the alleged misconduct was a one-time incident and a 
fabrication by a former employer to justify his unlawful firing.12 (Answer; Exhibit A.) 
                                                          
9 (emphasis added). See also Directive, ¶ 4.3; ISCR Case No. 12-11375 at 6 (App. Bd. June 17, 2016) 
(“While non-alleged conduct may be relevant in establishing an SOR allegation, it may not become the 
basis for denying or revoking a security clearance.”).  
 
10 Applicant also complied with the case management order, forwarding his hearing exhibits to Department 
Counsel a week before the hearing. Applicant’s email forwarding his hearing exhibits and a copy of each 
of the attached documents (with notation as to their corresponding Exhibit letter) was included in the record 
as App. Exh. VI.  
 
11 Directive, ¶ E3.1.22 (prohibiting the admission of third-party statements in DOHA proceedings, unless 
the party-opponent is given an opportunity to cross-examine the declarant of the statement or if the 
proponent of the evidence establishes the two listed exceptions). 
 
12 The Federal Rules of Evidence (Fed. R. Evid.) serve as a guide in DOHA proceedings, and can be 
relaxed by a judge to allow for the development of a full and complete record regarding a person’s suitability 
for access to classified information. Directive, ¶ E3.1.20. The Appeal Board has generally found this type 
of Fed. R. Evid. 404(b)-type evidence admissible in DOHA proceedings. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-00978 
(App. Bd. Jun. 16, 2016); ISCR Case No. 08-06334 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2010). See also Fed. R. Evid. 608(b) 
(permitting cross-examination with extrinsic evidence of a witnesses’ conduct if such conduct is probative 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant objected to the admission of Appellate Exhibit IV or its consideration on several 
grounds, including lack of proper notice. 
 
 The alleged unprofessional conduct described in the internal corporate email 
(Appellate Exhibit IV) post-dates the employee misconduct alleged in the SOR, and 
involves a different employer on an unrelated government contract. Applicant was not 
aware of this email before it was handed to him on the stand during cross-examination. 
Department Counsel did not send the document to Applicant before the hearing, and did 
not provide notice of his intent to use the document at hearing. In response to questions 
as to why the Government had not provided such notice or amended the SOR pre-hearing 
to reflect this new potentially disqualifying information, Department Counsel stated that 
the document was received after the SOR was issued. Department Counsel declined the 
opportunity to amend the SOR to reflect the information set forth in Appellate Exhibit IV. 
Based on the lack of proper notice, I sustained Applicant’s objection to the admission of 
Appellate Exhibit IV.13 (Tr. 88-104, 185-186.) 
 
 At the same time, over Applicant’s objection, I permitted Department Counsel to 
cross-examine Applicant regarding the unalleged conduct described in the email for the 
limited purpose of impeachment.14 The cross-examination did not elicit any relevant 
evidence that would substantiate the allegations of employee misconduct set forth in the 
internal corporate email or which would tend to substantially undermine Applicant’s 
testimony. At most, the evidence adduced at hearing reflects that Applicant’s work was 
deficient and he was placed on an employee performance plan.15  
 
                                                          
as to truthfulness); Fed. R. Evid. 806 (the credibility of a declarant may be attacked through “evidence of a 
declarant's inconsistent statement or conduct, regardless of when it occurred. . . .”) (emphasis added). 
 
13 Generally, an adverse party is not entitled to advanced notice of rebuttal evidence, as the proponent of 
such evidence would not be aware of its necessity. See generally ISCR Case No. 00-0433, 2001 DOHA 
LEXIS 349, * 8 (App. Bd. Sep. 6, 2001) (“An applicant is not entitled to written notice that Department 
Counsel wants to present evidence to impeach or rebut documentary or testimonial evidence that applicant 
presents at a hearing.”) Here, the Government was on clear notice well before the hearing as to Applicant’s 
position and the evidence he would be presenting. Counsel affirmatively chose not to provide notice 
regarding Appellate Exhibit IV until well into his cross-examination. The Government’s attempt to use the 
proverbial “shield” as a “sword” does not square with the explicit notice and liberal disclosure requirements 
of the Directive, applicable executive orders, and fundamental notions of fairness. 
 
14 ISCR Case No 96-0360, n. 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 25, 1997) (“The Board rejects Department Counsel's 
argument that impeachment is limited to actual witnesses at a DOHA hearing. . . . Either party can seek to 
impeach the testimony of a witness, or any written statement or other documentary evidence that is 
admitted into evidence during the proceedings below.”) See also ISCR Case No. 00-0433, 2001 DOHA 
LEXIS 349, * 5 (in finding that the judge erred in not allowing the cross-examination of an applicant with 
extrinsic evidence of similar conduct alleged in the SOR, the Board stated: “[i]mpeachment of a witness's 
testimony is relevant, even if the testimony being impeached is not directly related to an SOR allegation.”) 
 
15 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 08-08085 (App. Bd. Apr. 21, 2010) (where an applicant’s prior inconsistent 
statements, which were summarized in an otherwise inadmissible report of investigation, were effectively 
used as impeachment and properly considered by the judge in assessing credibility). 
 
5 
 
 
 After reviewing the entire 200-page transcript and the exhibits, I have reconsidered 
my evidentiary ruling and now sustain Applicant’s objection. The evidence adduced at 
hearing regarding the unalleged conduct is of limited probative value and is substantially 
outweighed by the unfairness resulting from the lack of proper notice and late, unexcused 
disclosure of Appellate Exhibit IV.16 In explaining the purpose behind the disclosure 
requirement in E3.1.13, the Appeal Board has previously stated the following: 
 
Although DOHA proceedings are adversarial in nature, they are not 
supposed to be “hearing by ambush.” . . . The purpose of Directive, Item 
E3.1.13 is not to ensure that only admissible documents are entered into 
evidence. Rather, the purpose of Item E3.1.13 is to provide the parties with 
a reasonable opportunity to prepare for a hearing, and to avoid undue 
surprise and needless delay.17 
 
Accordingly, I have not considered this unalleged conduct in reaching my decision 
regarding Applicant’s suitability for continued access to classified information. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
General Background 
 
Applicant, 64, immigrated to the United States in 1981 and became a U.S. citizen 
in 1994. He is divorced and has a child, who lives with her mother overseas. He states 
that he has been supporting the federal government as a contractor for nearly 30 years 
and reports first receiving a security clearance in about 1995. A number of former 
coworkers and supervisors provided favorable recommendations, noting Applicant’s 
professionalism in the workplace. Applicant has received awards and recognitions for his 
work as a federal contractor, including a recent award for going “above and beyond” by 
traveling out-of-state late on a Friday evening to install critical upgrades for a client’s 
information systems over a holiday weekend. He has been with his current employer for 
at least two years.18 
 
Alleged Employee Misconduct 
 
Applicant worked for Contractor A on two separate occasions. He was employed 
as an information assurance specialist from November 2009 to June 2010.19 His 
supervisor at the time told an investigator conducting Applicant’s security clearance 
investigation that Applicant “was a good worker, he was by the book.”20 His team lead 
                                                          
16 Cf. Fed. R. Evid. 403. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 01-23356 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2003). 
 
18 Tr. 7-8, 19, 32-70, 82-86; Exhibits 1, 2, A, B, G, H.  
 
19 Exhibit 1 at 13-17.  
 
20 Exhibit G at 2.  
 
6 
 
 
and the program manager testified at hearing, and provided favorable information 
regarding Applicant’s work, reliability, trustworthiness, and the manner in which he 
handled his security obligations.21 Applicant’s former program manager testified that 
Applicant “did what he was told to do.”22  
 
Applicant reports resigning from his position with Contractor A in June 2010 for a 
better job opportunity. Specifically, he was hired as a direct federal employee of a U.S. 
Government agency. He lasted four months in the new job before resigning due to a lack 
of “guidance or support.” He was then unemployed for about three months before 
rejoining Contractor A in June 2010.23  
 
The employee handbook that Applicant signed states that Applicant’s employment 
with Contractor A was “At-Will.” As an at-will employee, Contractor A had the “right to 
terminate [Applicant’s] employment at any time, regardless of any verbal or written 
statements issued by [Contractor A] and with or without cause or advance notice.”24 
 
 Applicant’s second tour with Contractor A did not end well. He and his first-line 
supervisor did not get along after Applicant refused to report to work to fill in for another 
employee who could not make it into work due to an emergency.25 The supervisor 
discussed with Human Resources (HR) her frustrations with Applicant. HR advised 
Applicant’s former supervisor that her failure to document Applicant’s purported 
workplace issues in writing could potentially cause a legal issue for the company if 
Applicant were subsequently fired.26 The supervisor was specifically advised by HR to 
provide Applicant written counseling on a HR-prepared counseling form. No such 
documentation is reflected in the employment records admitted into the record.  
 
 The workplace issues between Applicant and his former supervisor came to a head 
between late December 2011 and early January 2012. She fired Applicant via email on 
January 4, 2012. Applicant immediately replied to the email, requesting an explanation 
for the firing. Two days later, Applicant’s former supervisor sent him another email setting 
forth a number of reasons for the firing, principally dealing with her view that he was not 
a team player. The supervisor also claimed for the first time that following an internal 
review it was uncovered that Applicant had committed timecard fraud.27 (No 
                                                          
21 Tr. 32-70.  
 
22 Tr. 52.  
 
23 Exhibit 1 at 13-17.  
 
24 Exhibit 3 at 21.  
 
25 Exhibit 3; Tr. 40-46, 79-81.  
 
26 Exhibit 3 at 14 (HR email to Applicant’s former supervisor: “we need documentation that [Applicant] was 
counseled. . . . if we eventually terminate [him], he could always claim that he was not counseled. This may 
become a problem or it may not, but this is the body armor we would need.”). 
 
27 Exhibit 3 at 9-16. 
 
7 
 
 
documentation was contained in the employee records and no credible evidence was 
offered to substantiate this allegation of employee misconduct.)  
 
Applicant acknowledges that he received both emails from his former supervisor, 
understood the reasons she gave for firing him, and that both emails clearly state he was 
not eligible for rehire. Applicant adamantly denies he committed timecard fraud or any 
other misconduct alleged by his former supervisor. He disagrees with the written reasons 
given by his former supervisor for his firing, and suspects the true reason(s) for his firing 
was something else.28 
 
After being fired, Applicant filed for unemployment compensation. A state agency 
conducted an independent investigation to determine Applicant’s eligibility for 
unemployment compensation.29 A memo that Contractor A’s HR Director wrote during 
the course of this independent investigation was included with Applicant’s employment 
records. In the memo, the HR Director stated that Applicant was terminated because the 
government client complained about Applicant’s “rude and unprofessional behavior and 
refusal to follow directives.”30 (The memo from the HR Director makes no mention of 
timecard fraud.) The HR Director also stated in the memo that he would attend the hearing 
before the state agency and an internal email from the company shows that the HR 
Director requested written documentation from Applicant’s former supervisor showing the 
counseling she had purportedly accomplished.31 No one from the company attended the 
unemployment compensation hearing. The state agency determined that Applicant was 
not fired for cause and granted Applicant’s request for unemployment compensation. 
 
The HR Director also states in the memo that Applicant “was verbally counseled 
prior to [his termination]” by RM, a different supervisor.32 RM provided a letter that was 
admitted into the record without objection. RM makes no mention of this supposed 
counseling. Instead, RM states that: 
 
During my time as the [ ] team lead, [Applicant] put forth great effort . . . [he] 
was generally professional towards me during my time on the team and 
enthusiastic about his role in supporting the mission.33 
 
                                                          
28 Tr. 73-76, 104-107, 113-118, 131, 180-181; Exhibits A, D, I – K.  
 
29 Exhibit C; Tr. 129-132.  
 
30 Exhibit 3 at 4; Tr. 125.  
 
31 Exhibit 3 at 4, 9.  
 
32 Exhibit C.  
 
33 Exhibit E. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant testified that the only discussion he recalls having with RM before being fired 
was about the poor relationship with his former supervisor.34 RM was the employee 
whose shift Applicant did not cover for when RM was unable to go to work.  
 
Security Clearance Interview 
 
 In June 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. In response to 
questions about his employment history, Applicant reported that he had been fired by 
Contractor A six months earlier. He went on to say that he was “not sure to this day” the 
reason for his firing. He further stated: 
 
I am still unsure why I and several other people were cut from the contract 
as there were different contractors working on same project. It appears that 
there is infighting between the contracting companies involved in the 
project.35 
 
Applicant testified that he understood the importance of the security clearance 
application, and the need to be “truthful, accurate, and complete” in his responses to the 
questions asked on the application.36 He maintains that he is uncertain as to the true 
reasons he was fired from his position with Contractor A.37 
 
 In September 2012, an investigator interviewed Applicant as part of the clearance 
reinvestigation process. Regarding his firing from Company A, Applicant stated that he 
received an email from his supervisor informing him that he had been fired, and “telling 
him to report to the security building and return his [ ] badge.” He went on to say that “the 
email did not say why [he] was being fired.” He further told the investigator that: (1) “he 
did not ask why he was being fired,” (2) “had experienced no problems while working for 
[Contractor A];” and (3) “would be eligible for rehire.”38   
 
Applicant also told the investigator that he was fired around the same time that a 
competing firm won the government contract he had been working on while employed by 
Contractor A. He noted that his supervisor “may have thought” that he was one of several 
employees talking about leaving Contractor A to join the other firm.39  
 
                                                          
34 Tr. 125-129.  
 
35 Exhibit 1 at 14; Tr. 77-78.  
 
36 Tr. 146-147.  
 
37 Tr. 173.  
 
38 Exhibit 2 at 4-5. But see Tr. 73-76, 104-107, 113-118; Exhibits A, D (Applicant received both emails from 
his former supervisor, which, in part, state that he is not eligible for rehire. He also received the second 
longer email from his former supervisor after requesting an explanation for why he was fired.) 
 
39 Exhibit 2 at 4-5; Tr. 153-165.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant testified that he was not trying to mislead the security investigator. He 
acknowledges that he may not have been “forthcoming in [his] answers’ to the 
investigator, since he had read the emails from his former supervisor and did not expand 
upon the reasons given for his termination. He insists, however, that he was “being very 
open with that investigator.”40 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
40 Tr. 181-182.  
 
10 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The crux of the security concerns alleged in the SOR are that Applicant was fired 
from his job with Contractor A for serious employee misconduct, namely, timecard fraud, 
and that he then lied during the course of a security clearance investigation about the 
facts and circumstances surrounding his job termination. The weight of the evidence 
tends to favor Applicant’s position that he was not fired for misconduct, but instead due 
to a caustic work relationship with his former supervisor. At the same time, however, the 
evidence shows that Applicant was not fully candid during his security clearance interview 
when discussing this job termination.  
 
 The record evidence raises the personal conduct security concern, which is 
explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable national security 
eligibility determination . . .  refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful 
answers to lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I have considered all the applicable disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, including the following pertinent ones: 
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative; 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
11 
 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability. 
 
Alleged Employee Misconduct (SOR 1.a) 
 
 The Government did not supply sufficient evidence to meet its burden of proof as 
to the allegation of employee misconduct referenced in SOR 1.a. The evidence suggests 
that the actual reason for Applicant’s termination from Contractor A was related to the 
acrimonious workplace relationship between Applicant and his former supervisor. A job 
termination under such circumstances does not raise a security concern. 
 
 In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the employment records from 
Contractor A relating to Applicant’s firing, including the unsigned, undated, post-
termination memorandum purportedly prepared by Applicant’s former supervisor, and 
given it little weight. The documents making up the employment records are internally 
inconsistent and contradictory, and were clearly prepared with an eye towards litigation. 
The HR Director, in the memo that he prepared for the state unemployment agency, did 
not support the former supervisor’s unsubstantiated claim of timecard fraud. After 
conducting its own investigation and holding a hearing, the independent state agency 
determined that Applicant was eligible for unemployment compensation, as he was not 
fired for cause.41 AG ¶ 17(f) applies to this SOR allegation.  
 
Security Clearance Interview (SOR 1.b) 
 
 Applicant’s claim that he was candid (or, in his words, “very open”) with the 
investigator is not credible. At the time of the clearance interview, which took place a few 
months after he was fired, Applicant had received, read, and understood the two emails 
his former supervisor sent him explaining why she, his boss, had fired him. Even though 
he disagreed with the reasons she gave in those emails for his firing, he was not at liberty 
to simply disregard them when asked by the investigator about the job termination.  
 
 Moreover, Applicant attempted to mislead the investigator as to the details 
surrounding the job termination. He weaved a story that left the clear impression that he 
was likely fired for being a disloyal employee who was going to jump ship to a competitor. 
He falsely told the investigator that he was eligible for rehire by Contractor A. This was 
contrary to what his former supervisor explicitly told him in both emails (objectively false 
                                                          
41 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03886 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2012) (judge’s acceptance of applicant’s 
version of events for his firing over the employer’s version undermined, in part, by “the evidence that a state 
authority had denied Applicant’s unemployment claims because they believed he had been fired for fraud.”) 
 
12 
 
 
statement). He also had no factual basis upon which he could subjectively believe that 
his statements to the investigator, including that he was eligible for rehire, were true.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the candor of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the security clearance application and continues 
throughout the security clearance process. However, the omission of material, adverse 
information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant deliberately 
falsified his or her response to a question on an application or asked by a security 
investigator. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission, including a person’s age, level of education, work experience, 
and familiarity (or lack thereof) with the security clearance process, in assessing intent.42 
 
 Persons seeking to obtain or maintain a security clearance are required to provide 
full, frank, and truthful answers in response to questions asked by a security investigator, 
including providing information that might put them in a potentially bad light. Otherwise, a 
concern arises that the person cannot be trusted to divulge all relevant information in 
other settings, such as a security breach or violation.43 Here, Applicant failed to show that 
he can be trusted by the Government.  
 
 Applicant provided half-truths and deliberately held back pertinent material 
information during his security clearance interview. He did so because he disagreed with 
the reasons his former supervisor provided him for his firing. Although the record evidence 
does not support the serious misconduct alleged by his former supervisor, such does not 
excuse Applicant’s decision to not divulge critical and potentially derogatory information 
to the clearance investigator. Nor does it justify Applicant’s attempt to mislead the 
investigator about the reasons for his firing by Contractor A. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 Additionally, I find that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Although the 
falsification occurred five years ago, Applicant still fails to accept responsibility for his 
security-significant conduct. The passage of time alone without evidence of true reform 
and rehabilitation is of limited mitigating value. Therefore, Applicant’s lack of candor 
during the security clearance process continues to raise a security concern.44 
 
  
                                                          
42 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
43 SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(i) (“the adjudicative process is predicated upon individuals providing relevant 
information pertaining to their background and character for use in investigating and adjudicating their 
national security eligibility. Any incident of intentional material falsification . . . raises questions about an 
individual's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness and may be predictive of their willingness or ability to 
protect the national security.”)  
 
44 ISCR Case No. 15-04856 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (Board affirms denial of an applicant who provided 
false statements during the processing of his 2002 security investigation, some 15 years earlier); ISCR 
Case No. 10-05909 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012) (affirming denial where applicant deliberately sought to 
conceal the details behind his past job terminations).  
 
13 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate 
my above analysis and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for many years without apparent issue 
beyond those discussed herein. He has generally been considered a good, hardworking, 
conscientious employee. This evidence raises favorable inferences regarding his 
suitability. However, the favorable record evidence is insufficient to outweigh the serious 
security concerns raised by his lack of candor and attempt to mislead the security 
investigator during his clearance interview. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information.45 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for continued 
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
45 I considered the exceptions in Appendix C to SEAD-4 and do not find that any of the exceptions are 
warranted in this case. Applicant’s disqualifying conduct was deliberate and serious, and he has yet to 
accept responsibility for it. See SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and Appendix A, ¶ 2(h); contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-
03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of the guidelines, judges had “no authority to 
grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance.”)  
