KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline D; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant states that he was “blindsided” by Department Counsel’s exhibits. The
Judge gave Applicant an opportunity to examine Department Counsel’s exhibits and offered to
continue the hearing for 30 days in order to give him an opportunity to prepare. He also gave
Applicant 30 days after the hearing to submit additional evidence.  Applicant offered no
objections to Department Counsel’s exhibits when they were offered into evidence. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-02895.a1
DATE: 06/23/2017
DATE: June 23, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02859
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On 
November 20, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline D (Sexual
Behavior), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2,
1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 6, 2017, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process, whether
the Judge’s findings were erroneous, and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not at issue
in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
While riding an escalator at a shopping mall, Applicant placed his cell phone underneath the
skirt of a girl who appeared to be about 13 to 15 years old.  Upon being stopped by the police,
Applicant admitted that he had videotaped a girl with his cell phone.  He gave the phone and
password to the police, who discovered that the most recent video on the phone was taken from
underneath the skirt of a female.  The police found four other such videos.  Applicant told the police
that he had a problem and had been recording videos such as the one in question for two to three
weeks.  He described the impulse as an “uncontrollable urge.”  Decision at 3.  Applicant pled no
contest to a charge of having secretly recorded another person’s body underneath the clothing for
the purpose of gratifying the offender’s sexual desires.  
At the hearing, Applicant denied having made the admissions described above.  He recalled
giving his cell phone to the policeman but did not know if anything incriminating was found on it. 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant denied having committed the offenses.  Subsequently, a
court changed Applicant’s plea to not guilty and dismissed the charge.  Applicant has received
therapy.
Applicant received a certificate of appreciation for his having detected someone who was
a security threat.  He is dedicated to his work and takes pride in doing a good job.
The Judge’s Analysis
The incident described above was alleged under each of the three Guidelines referenced in
the SOR.  The Judge resolved the Guideline E allegation in Applicant’s favor insofar as it was
duplicative of the of the Guidelines J and D concerns.  In resolving these latter two Guidelines
against Applicant, the Judge stated that Applicant had successfully completed probation.  However,
he described the offense as serious and recent.  He also noted the multiple nature of Applicant’s
misconduct, insofar as videos of several girls or women were found on his cell phone.  He cited to
Applicant’s admissions to the police and stated that Applicant had not expressed remorse.  He also
stated that it is not clear whether Applicant was frank with his therapist.
Discussion
Applicant states that he was “blindsided” by Department Counsel’s exhibits, which he had
not seen prior to the hearing.  He states that he was not aware in advance that “such exhibit” would
be offered into evidence and that he was not prepared for the hearing.1  We have examined the
transcript and note that, prior to the hearing, Applicant advised the Judge that he had not received
discovery from Department Counsel.  The Judge gave Applicant an opportunity to examine
Department Counsel’s exhibits and offered to continue the hearing for 30 days in order to give him
an opportunity to prepare.  He also gave Applicant 30 days after the hearing to submit additional
evidence.  Applicant did not request a 30-day continuance but did submit a post-hearing document,
which was admitted without objection.  Decision at 2; Tr. at 11.  Moreover, he offered no objections
to Department Counsel’s exhibits when they were offered into evidence.  Tr. at 20.  We find no
reason to believe that Applicant was denied an opportunity to prepare his case for mitigation or that
he was otherwise denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
04472 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2017).
Applicant states that the Judge’s material findings were based on assertions by persons who
never came before the hearing.  We construe this as an argument that GE 3 is not worthy of belief. 
As stated in the footnote above, GE 3 is a police report.  Although it contains hearsay, this exhibit
is admissible both as an official record under Directive ¶ E3.1.20 and as a public record under
Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8).  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 25,
2009).  The contents of GE 3, when read in conjunction with all the other evidence in the record,
support the Judge’s findings regarding Applicant’s security-significant conduct.  The Judge’s
material findings are supported by substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01285 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016).  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
1We take this to refer to Government Exhibit (GE) 3, a police report, which contained a description of the
offense, Applicant’s admissions, etc.  Department Counsel questioned Applicant extensively about the contents of this
exhibit.   Tr. at 33-49.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
