 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02090  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to make monthly mortgage payments between March 2012 and 
July 2014, without apparent justification. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 
order to stop the resulting foreclosure proceedings. Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 11, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). (Item 3.) On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2015, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On March 30, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on March 31, 2016, and received by him on April 7, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not 
file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time beyond the 30-day 
period he was afforded to respond.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 
2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, 
although this decision is issued pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He never married, and has one adult child. He has held 
his present employment with a defense contractor since October 2013. He served for 
two years in the Air Force, and was honorably discharged in September 1976. He has 
previously held security clearances without incident while holding various positions in 
the defense industry. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant purchased his home with an $81,431 first mortgage loan that was 
opened in February 2002. In January 2005, he refinanced the remaining balance on that 
loan with a new $78,200 first mortgage. In April 2006, he took out a $60,000 second 
mortgage loan. He did not explain the purpose for which he used those equity funds. In 
January 2008, he paid off his outstanding first and second mortgage loan balances, and 
withdrew further equity, with a new $142,858 first mortgage loan requiring monthly 
payments of $1,361. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant worked as a technician for a defense contractor for about 29 years until 
April 2009, when he was laid off. He remained unemployed until March 2011, when he 
was hired by another company. He was laid off again in April 2013, and remained 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
unemployed until beginning his present employment as a technician in October 2013. 
(Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant bought a used car with a secured $19,262 automobile loan in February 
2012. His monthly payments on that loan were $333. In March 2012, Applicant stopped 
making his mortgage payments, although he had been employed for a year at the time. 
He offered no explanation for this decision. By November 2013, his mortgage lender 
had initiated foreclosure proceedings against him with a past-due amount of $29,943. 
By July 2014, his mortgage loan delinquency had grown to $41,256. (Item 2; Item 3; 
Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he, “had to file bankruptcy to stop foreclosure on my house.” 
(Item 2.) His initial Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition was filed on June 26, 2014. It listed 
only his home mortgage and automobile loan as secured debts, and the two delinquent 
medical collection accounts, totaling $693, as unsecured debts. His income and 
expense schedules reported a net monthly surplus of $440 after making required 
mortgage and automobile loan payments. On August 22, 2014, Applicant filed an 
amended Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, which was confirmed by the bankruptcy court 
judge on August 29, 2014. The confirmed plan required Applicant to pay $450 per 
month for 36 months, and then $1,375 per month for 24 months to the trustee in order 
to fully repay his mortgage arrearage and bankruptcy costs. The plan also required him 
to continue making future payments toward the mortgage and automobile loans outside 
the plan. Record credit reports show that he remains current on the automobile loan and 
started making his $1,361 monthly mortgage payments again in July 2014. The two 
medical debts, last reported to be in collection in October 2013, have been paid and do 
not appear on Applicant’s more recent credit reports. (Item 2; Items 5 through 11.) 
 
 Applicant completed the mandatory bankruptcy financial management course in 
October 2014. He offered no evidence to support findings concerning his good 
character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional performance, the level of 
responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had been employed for a year, and had just purchased a $19,000 used 
car, when he stopped making payments toward his mortgage loan in March 2012. He 
made no further mortgage payments until July 2014, when required to do so by 
bankruptcy proceedings he filed to stop the foreclosure initiated by his mortgage lender. 
He offered no justification for his failure to make required mortgage payments for more 
than two years despite the apparent ability to do so. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s failure to make his required monthly mortgage payments lasted for 
more than two years from 2012 to 2014. It began more than a year after he regained 
employment, and a month after he borrowed more than $19,000 to buy a car. His 
absence of a reasonable explanation for this conduct precludes a finding that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his current trustworthiness. Mitigation was 
not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
While Applicant experienced about six months of involuntary unemployment in 
2013, he did not demonstrate how that affected his overall financial situation. He had 
already failed to make his mortgage payments for more than a year at the time of that 
lay off. The evidence does not sufficiently establish causation, or show that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant has been making his mortgage payments since July 2014, as well as 
the required $450 monthly bankruptcy payments since his Chapter 13 plan was 
confirmed in August 2014. However, those monthly payments are scheduled to more 
than triple (from $450 to $1,375) for the last 24 months of the plan beginning in the 
summer of 2017. The record budget information showed only a $440 monthly surplus of 
available income over Applicant’s living expenses, and is devoid of evidence that he will 
be able to make the new higher payments. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish 
mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. After failing to make required mortgage payments 
 
 
7 
 
 
for more than two years, he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection to stop the 
pending foreclosure action by his mortgage lender. Without evident change in his 
income, he resumed making regular mortgage payments and started making $450 
monthly bankruptcy payments in August 2014. However, in the absence of a reasonable 
explanation for two years of non-payment, or of evidence that he will be able to comply 
with significantly larger bankruptcy payments during the final 24 months of the plan, 
recurrence is not unlikely.  
 
 The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Should 
Applicant successfully complete his ongoing bankruptcy plan, he will have alleviated 
that potential and demonstrated rehabilitation. However, the record evidence does not 
currently support a conclusion that he is likely to do so. Overall, the evidence creates 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
