 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-07994 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a determination on the administrative (written) record (Answer). 
 
 On June 23, 2016, Department Counsel prepared her written case, known as a 
file of relevant material (FORM) and sent it to Applicant. With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant nine exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant 
submitted a response to the FORM (Response). The exhibits accompanying the FORM 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
and the documents Applicant submitted with his Answer and Response are admitted 
into the record.2 On May 9, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 37, is applying to retain a security clearance that he was initially 
granted while serving in the U.S. military. Currently, he is working overseas supporting 
the U.S. military as a federal contractor.  
 
From 2003 to 2011, Applicant was on active duty in the U.S. military. He is a 
disabled veteran. After receiving an honorable discharge from the military in September 
2011, Applicant was unemployed for about six months.  
 
In March 2012, Applicant was hired by a federal contractor to work overseas. 
That job assignment ended in January 2013. He was again unemployed until October 
2013, when he was hired by his current employer.   
 
Applicant fell behind on his court-ordered child support for the children from his 
first marriage – a marriage that ended in divorce in 2006. Applicant reported his 
delinquent child support on his 2014 security clearance application and discussed it 
during his clearance interview. He estimated on the application that he was about 
$5,000 in arrears on his child support. He told the security clearance investigator that 
State A, where his former spouse had moved with their children after the divorce, 
claimed he owed $50,000 in past-due child support.  
 
Applicant also told the clearance investigator that he was in the process of 
collecting the necessary paperwork to show State A how much he paid his ex-wife in 
child support since their divorce. He did not pay his child support through the court or a 
state agency. Instead, while in the military, he paid his child support through a voluntary 
allotment from his pay. After leaving the military, Applicant sent his former spouse 
monthly checks.  
 
Applicant, with his Answer, submitted over 115 pages of documents showing 
that, while in the military, he had a voluntary allotment taken out of his pay in the exact 
amount that he was ordered to pay in child support ($680 a month). (See Answer, 
Leave and Earning Statements.) He also provided copies of the paid checks made out 
to his former spouse for child support. With his Response, Applicant provided 
documentation showing that he is now making his monthly child support payments 
through a state agency. His credit reports do not reflect any other delinquent account.  
  
                                                          
2 Administrative documents, including confirmation of Applicant’s continuing sponsorship for a clearance, 
were collectively marked and attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit I. 
 
3 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD-4), revising the Adjudicative Guidelines. The revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all 
security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (hereinafter “AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
3 
 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his court-ordered child support while unemployed 
and accrued a past-due balance. This situation raises the Guideline F security concern, 
which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
 
4 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.4 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his court-ordered child support, which was 
established while he was still in the military and receiving a reliable paycheck on the first 
and the fifteenth of every month. After separating from the military, Applicant 
experienced two periods of unemployment that left him unable to pay his child support. 
He apparently did not apply for a modification, which when coupled with his equally 
unwise decision to not setup a child support account with the state, left him in his 
current unenviable predicament. However, these past poor personal decisions do not 
raise a concern about his ability to handle and safeguard classified information.  
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
Applicant addressed the concern raised by the SOR allegation. Notably, he 
presented clear and unambiguous documentary evidence to support his position that he 
has been paying and is currently paying his child support. His credit reports do not 
reflect any other delinquent account. In short, Applicant is resolving the issue with his 
child support account and his current financial situation does not raise a security 
concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) apply.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, including 
considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2, I find that Applicant met his 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns raised by the 
SOR allegation. Furthermore, he established his eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
