 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-01064 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 8, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On February 23, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated May 5, 2016, was provided to him by letter that same 
day. Applicant received the FORM on May 13, 2016. He was afforded a period of 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not submit any additional information within the 30-day period. On May 3, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d – 1.f, and 1.i, and denied the remaining 
allegations.  His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old technician employed by a defense contractor since 
July 2012. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current employment. 
(Item 2)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1975. No other information about his 
education is contained in the FORM. (Items 2, 3) Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from 
1979 to 1999 as an enlisted person, and was honorably discharged. (Item 2) Applicant 
was previously married from 1985 to 1997, and that marriage ended by divorce. He 
remarried in 1997. (Item 2) Applicant has four adult children and stepchildren. (Item 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 12 allegations, 11 of which are combination of consumer 
and medical debts, two judgments, and two Federal tax liens, totaling approximately 
$24,674. The Federal tax liens total $12,399. The remaining allegation states Applicant 
failed to file and or pay his 2009 Federal taxes as required.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l; Item 1) 
These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions; his October 2, 2012 
SF-86; his November 21, 2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI); his October 3, 2012, January 22, 2015, and December 14, 2015 
credit reports. (Items 2 – 6) 
 
 In Applicant’s answer, he denies that he failed to file his Federal taxes, admits 
that he owes back taxes, and claims that he is on a payment plan. He claims the debts 
that he denied are not his, have been listed more than once on the SOR, or are being 
repaid. (Item 1) Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to support his denials.  
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR 
accounts including the non-filing of his 2009 Federal tax return. He did not describe 
financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 
days, as extended, from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . 
your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” 
on the evidence set forth in this FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(a). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his 
suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
